# natural language processing: embeddings
Yes, it's time, so let's get started. So many of the, at least those of you who are master students should be on this research seminar. So that's why we are a bit fewer people, but okay. So still a very important topic for today. So we're now starting our natural language processing. So we looked a bit on this yesterday and then today we'll get to one of the really big kind of concepts that enables us to build stuff like chat GPT and the large language models. This will start the next week and then we have actually two weeks to get into the details of large language models and then we'll look also before Easter a bit on other uses and going maybe a bit past the stuff in the book on these things. We are completely up to date on everything related to these transformers that power large language models. So for lab notebooks, you have some stuff to test relating to natural language processing as we call it, NLP. And one of those where to look into so-called embeddings and these we get to explain them today. So this is one of the two really big things really to understand about text models.

## From yesterday: (1:51)

So what did we do yesterday? So we looked at if we want to do classification, then we can be a bit clever on how we extract our so-called tokens. So the tokens would be the unit of meaning more or less that we stuff into the model. And then this can be words, but it's nice to take this standardized version of words. So I take volume, I remove periods and commas and stuff and I take a lowercase version of all the words. And then I have a limited vocabulary, which is nice when I want to do classification. So if we want to generate text, then maybe we don't want to do this because it looks a bit nicer if we can generate text that has commas and periods and uppercase letters and so on. But right now for classification, we just want the meaning. We don't really care about the finer points of making the text look nice. We just want meaning, but we need the meaning to be encoded somehow into numbers because we can only work in numbers. So then we have a list of things that we can do to end up with some numbers that make sense for our machine learning model. And then the big mantra of the course has been to take numbers and make even better numbers. Then on basis of the better numbers, we can make better decisions. And then today is all about really making better numbers. So in a very simplistic case, when I have a few different words to look at, we can do the classic one-hot encoding. But let's now do something more fancy. So we hinted towards it already, but let's get into how these work.

## Embeddings (3:45)

And these are the so-called embeddings. So the hints that we got in previous lectures towards this was that we can take categorical values. So if I have different classes, I can take these and then just map them onto an array of numbers instead. So vector, technically speaking. So if I now, given that we are working on texts, if I make my different categories be different tokens, different words, then my embeddings or the process of encoding this into embeddings would be to take this one. And now it's not going to be one single column saying yes or no that we saw this word, but it's actually going to be some numbers, floating point numbers. They have many qualities, at least one quality, which we'll get into, which is super, super nice. So these can be any numbers really. When we start, they truly are. So just like we initialize the parameters of our model to random numbers to begin with, also my vector for each of these different words will also just be random numbers. So I have to select how many random numbers I want, just like I select the parameters of my network and so on. And this will be the fixed length for each of them. So three component vector in this case, but this is free for me to choose. So it's kind of parameters. So I just have to choose how many I like. And then we can guess that, OK, if I choose this to be a very long list of numbers, then I have a lot of flexibility and also need a lot of training data to make good embeddings. Well, if it's smaller, I can do with less training data, but also have less capacity of my embedding space in the end. So I just put some numbers in some place to start, and then we optimize these during training, which is something completely different than this one hot encoding that we're used to. So the one hot encoding. So then this column is one word, this column is the next word, and it's just saying yes or no. Did we see this word at this location? And then this I make myself right. There is no there is no machine learning in this sequence. It's just taking the tokens and assigning numbers. And these embeddings are then completely different because I actually want to learn where these vectors should point. So it gets a little bit funky, right? Because now it's all of a sudden, that's not just a list of some numbers on words, but rather we made vector space, as it's called, and we made vectors of these points in different directions. And that is a bit more mathematically heavy right off the start, but it also comes with super nice properties that we can visualize these and look at distances and directions and so on. So if we can accept that, OK, we make this vector space, then we're kind of good to go. And then we can look into how this would work. So we'll spend some time today on looking at the demo, actually, or visualization of how these embeddings look. But before we get to this point, let's actually see how we can compute this stuff. So how do we do this mapping from one word or token into these numbers? And that is not too hard, actually, because we have been doing stuff like this all along. So this embedding business in the Keras library, it's just a layer. So like most things, it's just a layer. And it looks a whole lot like the typical dense layer that we use for a lot of things. A lot of things that we use for classification in the end. So what actually happens is almost the same as a dense layer. So we first, in fact, do this one hot encoding that I was complaining was not really very efficient. Let's just first do this. And then, so this input node will be kind of the presence of word number one. And this will be the presence of word number two by zero indexing. So that goes in here. Not by zero indexing, actually, but by one indexing. This goes in here. So this presence of one there. And then we just introduce weights and biases and compute the outputs as we would for any dense layer, really. So just step one, do this one hot encoding. So make a whole lot of columns for each of the words. So if I have 10,000 words, then I first need 10,000 columns. Okay. But then I just squeeze it into a fewer number in the end. So I have fewer columns coming out typically. So this, well, dense thing we know. So for each of these connections, I have a weight. So I multiply by the inputs and then add the bias. And then if I like, I can add up or apply an activation function as we know. Typically, we don't really use this for these embeddings. So it's just kind of a linear combination of these ones. And that is nice because, okay, so we start out. So if I do this one hot encoding, then I have, if I had 10,000 words, I would have 10,000 columns representing each of the words, right? But then I just select myself the number of outputs like I always do for a dense layer. I just put units equal three in this case. So then I can take this and squeeze it onto three different numbers. And then these will be floating point values between, could be anything coming out of this. So this I just selected. So I myself select what should be the dimensions of my embedding space. So I could code this myself. So this is a Keras sequential model, right? There's one layer called string lookup, which does the one hot encoding. And then I can apply the dense as I would for any classification thing. But turns out we can do this. We can implement this more efficiently. And that is just called Keras.layers.embedding. So you can code it yourself, but it's just practical. Practical speaking, it's going to be a lot faster if you use the layer that is called embedding. Well, it really does this seemingly simple thing, right? One hot encoding and then I can compute my output vectors for each of the token, each of the words. So seems simple enough, but it really works. So it's really a nice thing. So we'll look at this. And so as a developer, what do I need to do? Well, basically checking how many words do I have. So how big is my vocabulary, as we say, and this will be the number of input nodes. And then I have to decide how many output nodes would I want to have. And this is something I have to test myself. How many do I need? So typically this for like a modern large language model is going to be, I think if you pay for the OpenAI GPT token, tokenizer thing, the embedding space, you get 3000 and something out from this part. Oh, that seems to be like the usual numbers. So between 3000 and 4000 is reasonable if you want to make a state of the art model. If you want to make a smaller model, then choosing a smaller number obviously makes sense. But then there's how many dimensions do you want? So it's something for you to optimize. And yes, words in or not in coding, vectors coming out. And then we get to the fun part. So let's look at how these actually work.

## TensorBoard (13:12)

So let me do a little bit of explaining on this thing. So this jumps a bit on Zoom. Unfortunately, it actually looks quite nice on my screen, but it jumps a bit on Zoom. This is one of the tools that we mentioned the week before. Project Week is called TensorBoard. And this allowed you to visualize learning curves and all sorts of things. But it also comes with this so-called projector tool that allows me to basically show how different vector spaces look. So in this particular case, I have taken one of the older GPT models. So as we know, most recent GPT, I guess we're now at version 5, is commercial product. You have to pay to use it unless you have the free version, but you still pay by your data somehow. These most modern models are essentially business secrets. You don't really want to have neither the parameters or the embeddings floating around for this. But if we go back to not GPT version 4 or 3, but actually GPT version number 2, then this is open sourced by now. And we can take a look at it. And this is what I've done here. You could also do this while there are different open source models, of course, which are nice to look at. But this old GPT 2 is nice because it fits on a laptop, more or less. So just an example, and you can do this for any model, really, if you have access to the embedding space. So what happens when we train a large language model and gets to its next week, of course? But step one was getting words into numbers. We use these embeddings and then we stick some fancy stuff on top, which is called a transformer that we'll see next week. But let's say step one is making numbers out of the different words. And this projector thing is a visualization of what my fancy embedding space looks like. So while we said, go back, that you have to select how many dimensions, how big should the space be? How many degrees of freedom do you want in your fancy space that you generate yourself? For this old GPT 2 version, it's of dimension 768, which is kind of a big number. So it's very difficult to think on how a 768 element vector would look. So anything above dimension 3 is kind of tricky for us to visualize. I can visualize one dimension, which is a number, and I can visualize two dimensions, which is just a flat plane. And three dimensions would be something like this. So we have, I should say this, we have used a tool here to map all of these 768 dimensions down to three dimensions. So we have done a little bit of a nice visualization trick here, which you can, well, if you test this yourself, it's called the different ones you can use. But the point is that they try to show you in three dimensions how this fancy high dimensional space more or less would look like. So it's a kind of clever projection that tries to maintain distances between points. OK, but that's a digression. We actually just want to look at the different points. So they have some position given by, well, just the output of my embedding space, right? So this is along axis one, I have this value, axis two, I have this value, axis three, I have this value, so I can just plot it, right? And then we plot this with the help of our little tool. And then these just become points in the space, so to say. And these points, they are the tokens. So these are all the words that JetJPT, sorry, GPT version two knows. And it knows 50,257 different words. So that's the entire vocabulary of the old JetJPT. Well, now I'm saying words, but I mean, in fact, tokens, because they don't have to be complete words. So let's look into this. If I hover above something, you'll see the words coming up. See if I have some nice words, full words. Hopefully you can see, this is my max zoom, unfortunately. But then if I take this word, for instance, knowing, and I stuff it through the first layer of this model, then I obtain the embeddings. And this is the position of this one token. And then I can do this for all things. So here I have, just notice, has this position, apparently. And yeah, I can just see that different words have different positions in this space. This goes there. And you'll notice if I turn this around, I have a big blob of words in the middle. And then it seems I have also some words that are quite distant, like this thing. So let's spend a little time on looking at which of the tokens end up to be quite far away. So looking at this, well, apparently, here goes the numbers. So I have 49 goes there. I have 610, apparently, goes there. 490 goes there. So these are not the kind of typical words with meaning like the one we have in the center, but they have instead just number values. So I guess a bit funny when we tokenize numbers, of course, but still at least seems like numbers end up in one place. Here are also different numbers. Interestingly enough, spelled out numbers, like 60 in this case, is still placed along with the numbers. So it seems we are able to extract some information here. And all these are the years typically. So in training data, we had 1913, apparently, and it gets squeezed in together with all these different numbers. And then let's look at some other ones. So apparently, these numbers are kind of special, right, because they end up in a different place. Very much to the top of this blob, let's see what are these tokens. There I have a bracket, and I have just symbols, all sorts of weird stuff that end up kind of far away from the numbers. Interesting that these made it into the model, right. But in fact, the model doesn't really discriminate, right. It just takes some inputs training data, and then these are tokens that apparently are present. And then we tokenize them, we learn what they mean, more or less, and seems like they end up in this kind of separate parts. So the input text has these funny different symbols. Tokenize it, use it still. So then we explored the sort of more distant things, right. So all the numbers, they were quite far away for some reason. Special characters were also a bit far away. So let's look into kind of maybe the main parts of this blob. Now I want to find, let's find one word or token then, which is something we sort of know. Maybe this one, actions. Now I can click this one in the projector tool and then get up the ten nearest other words or other tokens. And here you see, okay, so first of all, you see that, well, they seem to be kind of far away. But that is just an effect of the fact that we have 768 dimensions and then squeeze it onto three. So the projection kind of lies a little bit. But if I just compute the distance between them in this high dimensional space, these on the list on the right there will be the nearest ones. And seems, so what is close in this embedding space to action? Well, it's action without the plural s. It's uppercase or lowercase or activities, for instance. So since like activities and actions, they kind of get close together. Let's try some other ones while we're at it. Wish. So which tokens are close to wish? We get wish, wishes, all these different variants of the same thing. Dream, hope, feel, will, gift, wonder. All these things end up pretty close. And there is absolutely a reason for this being close. So would you agree that when I clicked wish, I got these other ones? It's a bit hard to read, but this is how soon we can get it. Would you agree that these are, in fact, synonyms, more or less, or closely related words, all of these that are also closely related in distance? We can keep doing this. If I do another one. What is a word that has many synonyms? Camera is related apparently to photography, to images, pixels, all these things. So it seems that distance in the embedding space is in fact related to the meaning of each word. And that is kind of the genius thing of this. There is really called statistical semantics is the word for it. But just by looking at training data, I can infer, more or less, what a word means in relation to different other words. So of course, my large language model doesn't really know anything about kind of real sort of dictionary semantics, if you will. Because at no point did we feed this GPT model, a dictionary that says this word means this. In training of these things, we give them only data. So here is like the entire Internet, some books and stuff. Figure everything out yourself. And this is kind of the proof that it does absolutely figure stuff out itself. So the embedding space has semantic meaning. So the meaning of words is preserved in this big embedding space. And that is kind of the beauty of it. That just by training on some texts, then my model knows which words kind of mean the same. So if I click reporter, I get journalists, analysts, photographer, stuff, media, and so on. So apparently, the meaning of the word is kind of encoded in a way that makes sense also to us. So the shape of this entire thing, maybe it doesn't make sense to us. But it seems like words that mean the same thing, they are placed in the same parts of this embedding space. And that is the cool thing. So just by doing, well, this very simple thing, take my words into columns and then columns into vectors, then seems like closely related vectors, they do mean the same thing. That is very nice. So basically, I've built a kind of dictionary of similar words just by training on data that didn't really come with any explanation or anything. So just by looking at text and how words are used, we can understand, well, maybe not we, but the model can understand what does the words more or less mean in the sense which other words are similar. So open, then we have public and free and whatnot. Well, this you can also try yourself if you want. So the GPT-2 model is free for you to download and test. And it's a bit more convenient than the modern open source models because it does in fact fit on a laptop to test these things. And of course, it's kind of funny with this GPT-2 thing. It was given out in 2017, was it? I'm a bit unsure of the year. But this was where we had this thing like the company behind it called OpenAI that we know had this big news story, right? That we made a large language model so good that it's in fact dangerous to give it out in public. So there was a lot of fuss about this and the week after it was released to the public in any case. It didn't turn out to be too dangerous then, but still a nice media event we could say to put a bit of luster on this. And then the first kind of actual chat GPT, chatbot style model, I guess. I forget it was GPT version 3 or 2.5 or something. But we had this for a while. So this was this is kind of old. And then I guess end of 2022 was maybe when we had the first kind of chat GPT web page as we know it. So powered by a more modern model, but still the same thing more or less. All of the large language models, they rely on this trick to make these embedding spaces. And they are different for different models because they just come from the training process. But the beauty of it all is that, well, these dense networks, we know how to train them. We do gradient descent and whatnot. And then still if we can take a huge model put on top of this, as long as we can compute the gradients, then we can do gradient descent and we can learn this from data. So we just input the index of the word and then that's fine. And then train the remaining bits and looks like this. It's kind of, I would say, kind of fun to look at this. So if I click 153, which numbers are most close according to model? Apparently 154 and 152. So kind of point on, right? This is how close you can get to this integer value. So even for the numbers, it seems to extract this semantics in a quite clever way. So this we could potentially do for other models as well. And then see that, well, distances between points of the different words do carry meaning somehow, which is very cool. So, OK, that was the demo. And you're supposed to do this in notebooks as well. So please do. But we can look at how do we kind of get to these numbers? So as I said, we start out just initialize randomly. So there will be random numbers, meaning they point in random directions in my embedding space. But then once we start training the model, then they get moved around, like parameters get updated, right? It's just the same thing. And this is a figure I stole from the Handsome ML book. It basically shows how you start out from these light blue points, randomly initialized. And then the embedding vectors will sort of move around in the space until they end up in places where similar meaning end up in similar places. So in this case, near ocean is apparently one token, near a bay is a similar token. And they, well, we know they mean more or less the same thing. And they also end up in more or less the same spots in embedding space after training. So, of course, before training, they are kind of meaningless. And then we train and they will during training for each training step, they will move around until they end up in a spot where they make semantic sense. According to the model and well, accidentally also to us, actually.

## Computing similarity in embedding space (31:42)

Then we need to do a tiny bit of a bit of math before we do the break. So how do we, in fact, compute if words are similar or not? How do we decide if they have or how can we measure rather if words have the same meaning in this embedding space? And while computing distances between points, this we know, right? Easy math, so to say, just like well, taking position of this point and subtracting the position of this point should be one thing. But there are, in fact, two ways that we can we can meaningfully do this. So we saw in the demo that I once I clicked on each point, each of these tokens like this one, there's a name randomly and other names are apparently similar. And you will notice that I can select distance and there are two different measures of distance. And I still get more or less the same, but they are still maybe I can find one example where these two different distance concepts change a little bit typically mean the same thing. But that's let's let's see how these are defined. So which words we can ask them which words are similar and then how to compute? Well, we either compute the pure distance or we do something else. Step one distance between two vectors, different or distance between two positions rather this we kind of know, right? You take along each axis, you take the difference and then you square it and then square roots and so on. So in one dimension, it's super simple, right? It's just distance between two values and then two dimensions. You need to do this twice and then the square roots. But the nice thing is it scales up to any dimension. So this Euclidean distance, as we call it, it works in any dimensions. We can use it still in this seven hundred and sixty and sixty eight dimensional space. And it makes the same sense as it would in any any other space. Then, of course, you know all about regularization and so on. And this is the same as L2. So L2, if that means more to you than Euclidean norm, well, it is exactly the same thing. I just like to call it call it different words because we like it so much. So in different settings, it will be different words, but it's just really the same thing. Difference along each axis and then square and square roots. So this is this is what we know, right? So if I do look at this, so this obviously short distance. This one, obviously a longer distance. So this one is kind of just just our intuition really put into a formula. As I said, there was a second option, so we can do option two, which is called cosine similarity. The name comes from the fact that you will compute the cosine really. And if we recall from maths or physics, even cosine kind of gives you the the angular difference between two different positions. So it doesn't include the length of the vector. So let's see. OK, I will have an example after. But so this these two ones here, I should rather use different examples. Let's look at these three points. So this one and this one, this one. And if we go from this point inland to this point ocean, we see this is approximately so far. But if I go to inland to this near ocean thing, this seems to be double the distance, right? If we compute the Euclidean metric. So then these are kind of double the distance. But if I look at rather the angle from this one to this one or the angle from this one to this one, it's kind of the same, right? They point in the same direction, more or less. So then the what I call cosine similarity will be small for these ones. But the Euclidean distance will be a bigger number or a bigger difference between these two points. So it's kind of just our selection, really. Either should we look at kind of the actual distance, not really looking at the direction, just the distance, or should we look at the direction between things? These are two kind of philosophical approaches to how we consider things to be different in a vector space. We can do one example before we look at it again in the demo and then take a little break. But if I train a model on doing some kind of operations, there's a very silly stack overflow example for this. So I have a model that looks at customers in your shop and I want to find similar customers because then I can give them the same ads or something. Something like this. I want to just find if two customers are similar. So we have, well, user number one, he comes in to your shop, buys one egg or one pack of eggs, one pack of flour and one pack of sugar. These three things. Then comes your second customer for the day. Well, he actually buys a hundred packs of eggs and a hundred packs of flour and a hundred packs of sugar. Okay, these seem similar in what they buy, right? And then the last customer comes in and he, well, he buys also one pack of egg, but then he buys one vodka and one Red Bull and leaves. So it seems kind of different in these things that user three would buy. But then user three buys kind of the exact amount of stuff as user one. So if we're looking at, did you buy the same things? Then user one and user two are similar because they did in fact buy the exact same items. It's just like they bought different quantities of it. So if you want to do ads for waffle recipes or whatnot, then maybe these two users will be amenable to the same type of ads because they're interested in the same items. So there the cosine similarity would be nice. So they buy vastly different quantities, but they buy the same stuff. So we actually want to look at the kind of direction to which the items are pointing. But then if I want to find customers who buy kind of the same amount of stuff, then user one and three would be similar because they bought the exact same amount. It's just that they bought different things. So if I have my embedding space and then in this embedding space, I have Red Bull and eggs. They might be completely different. But still, if I have two short vectors and compare, they will be close. If I have one super long vector like this one and compare with a short one, then by Euclidean similarity, they will be very different. But by the angle, they will be similar. So I should well mention one technical note before our break. So when we make these embeddings, so actually how often a word will appear also affects to some extent where it will be placed. So distances in the Euclidean norm, as we like to see distances typically by intuition, are often not that useful. So even though they are kind of the intuitive choice, actually the angles between things might be better often looking at similarities. So if I have my blob, then the origin is the middle here. So if I take this number and this number, they are kind of distant, but they all point in the same direction from the origin. So by cosine similarity, they point in the same direction. So they have some kind of similarity. Well, yes, they are all numbers. So we can sort of agree to this. OK, that is similarities. And then we saw in this embedding space that actually meaningful relations exist. So words that mean the same thing end up in the same place. And that means we can select meaningful words when we want to train our big language model, which we want to do next week. OK, then we have been through a lot of stuff for now, so we still have more stuff. So no worries about the stuff. So let's do 15 minutes break and then 15 in a bit, actually, and then mid quarter past 11, like usual. OK, let's start back up and see if we can maybe finish a little bit early. Then, yeah, before we get back to embeddings, let's have a look at the calendar again. OK, we did a look at the calendar, but let's consider more the project work. So now I approved all of the submitted projects. So it looks very cool. Then it's just getting started, really. So remember, you can always show up on the lab to get help with your projects. So it's not just for the notebooks, but also for project work. You can show up and then get tips and tricks and then make your absolutely best type of project and then submit on April 30. That will be our absolutely no extensions at all deadline. Then we still have, I think we figured we have two months. So it's a steady amount of time, but still remember to start early because weeks move fast when you have other things you need to do as well. So the faster you get started now, the better it will be towards the end and also less stressful, of course, for you, which is also something to consider. But then let's get back to these embeddings. So we have a list of stuff in the course that is absolutely awesome. And then we had, well, first we saw convolutions are awesome and then we had different things. But embeddings also definitely go in this category of very cool stuff because, well, we mentioned we now made a vector space and it's kind of in the area of math. So we can also do math on these embeddings, which is which is kind of cool. And maybe even so there was quite a bit of fuss on this many years back when we first started working on embeddings and then realized all the cool stuff that you that you can do. Because if you have vectors, we know you can subtract vectors, you can add vectors, you can do these operations on vectors. And then you always get vectors back if you do these basic things. And then you can look at what happens when we do so and so. And then this is kind of it was the the stereotypical example back then. So if you take if you start on man, for instance, and then you take the difference vector difference from man to woman, this is a vector. This arrow points in a direction, right? And then you can start somewhere else like King and then add the same exact vector and then look at where does it point and it points in the region of Queen. So that's one example, right? So we have this kind of gender dimension to it that really does translate to different things. Another one, another one of these. So you can do kind of the different tenses of verbs. So if you have walking and walked, the these will we saw that for our case, these different tenses also ended up as different tokens in the embedding space. So if I look at the distance from walking to walk, start on a different one, which is swimming. And I just go in the same direction in the same distance. I will be very close to the position of the token that is swam. So walking and walk is the same change of tenses, swimming to swam, for instance. So these things are absolutely a thing. Super, super fun. You can do it for different things. You can do it for these are just some examples. But countries and capitals also have this funny property that's going from the position of a country to the position of its capital points you in the direction. That would be more or less the same vector when looking at all these different countries. So they're all kind of points in the same direction and the same distance. So you can do all this funny vector arithmetic in the embedding space. And it does make sense still to get kind of sensible results when you move about in distances and directions where you expect certain things. And this example got famous for not in fact being part of a large language model, but it was a type of model that would make only embeddings. So not a kind of word generation tool, but rather just a model that makes these embeddings. So you don't even need ChatGPT to do this. You just need text. You just need training data and then you will see when you train your embeddings that these interesting properties, they are maintained in your embedding space. So embedding space is super cool because they can or we can go in and see more or less what we would expect. And well, we remember we looked at some for the computer vision models. We looked at these different convolutional layers and looked at activations at least briefly. And then we saw that, OK, we kind of recognize some patterns because we can visualize. But it was a bit difficult at times to see exactly what does this pattern kind of mean. Does it mean something to us? And embeddings is kind of the same thing, but they make a little bit more sense to us, I think. So if we go in the embedding space and click on words and look at distances, then we'll typically kind of recognize. OK, yes, this operation or this distance or moving about in this direction in embedding space, it means so and so. It means, well, conjugating verbs or going from different genders to another one and so on. But still, we have to say the embedding space doesn't really have to make any sense to us. It just happens to do so. There are, of course, many tokens that look kind of ridiculous. And then it's hard for us, for instance, for these funny symbols to say exactly what is this supposed to mean and why is it close to these other words, things. And then, well, the model doesn't have any obligation to make sense to us, right? It's just trained to do its thing. And some things are understandable to us and other things are not. But still, these embedding spaces are super cool because we can, in fact, extract a lot of meaningful information and go in and study these things.

## Better text tokenisation (49:15)

But let's look again a little bit on this business of tokenization. So when we took words, we can split them on white space and say that each word is a token, right? But we could also be a little bit more clever about this and split them into subwords or even group them into groups that are one individual token. So again, we need a little bit of historical detour. So it said at the beginning we wouldn't really be doing those, but we do it a little bit still. And if we look at some words like conjugations, so m, s, r is all the same kind of thing, right? It means the same thing. It just looks different depending on how you would put it in a sentence. So sentence structure governs how we should choose the proper conjugation or the plural version of these. So we call it different lemmas, technically, of the word that is b to b. Now you can simplify stuff a little bit. So if you do a classification again and you only want the meaning of the word and you don't care too much about grammar, then you can simplify stuff a lot through these techniques that have been developed over a long time. So there's a lot of linguistic studies that go into how to do this. And then you get this, once you do it and you reduce it to kind of the simplest form, then you get sentences that are kind of, they sound ridiculous, but you kind of get the sense like, he is reading books would be he read a book. Okay, sounds stupid, and it is, but it has the same rough meaning, more or less. So if you want to squeeze down your vocabulary of words you have to learn, then this is a nice thing to do. But then again, it is a manual thing to do. Typically, we don't really want to do manual stuff. If you have limited data, you might have to do this, kind of add domain expertise like this. But you know, we really don't want to do too much manual stuff. What we actually want to do is just chuck in more training data and then let the model figure this out. And then we did have a brief look at this yesterday to look at this sub-words tokenization. And there are different algorithms for this. So again, like different models have their own embedding spaces, and often they also come with their own tokenization algorithm. So you have to, if you're using a pre-trend model, you have to check this and use the correct tokenizer as well, so that you do the correct pre-processing. And we saw this also for computer vision models, you have to pre-process the image according to what the model expects, and it's the same thing basically. So on the exam, we'll not get too much into how these tokenization algorithms work. We just have to know that they exist and they are different often. But we mentioned that they will just kind of split everything up to individual characters and then try to piece them together and find combinations that make sense. And some of them do make sense to us as well, but they don't really have to. But we can look at a couple of these. So these I pulled directly from GPT-2, this version, so it's the same things. Many of them make sense, so they're a bit weird. And some of them are full words like objective, stationary, things and so on. While some of them are obviously just a piece of words, some, you can see, have to be attached to something else, like ENC, you can say, I don't know, frequency or proficiency or anything, but it's kind of a modifier to just text on to different words. But then we also have this stuff that doesn't really make sense. These ones, I don't know where they came from. Lots of zeros is apparently something that pops up in training data. Some letter combinations kind of make sense, USB, right? Some of them don't really make too much sense. But this is just looking at the training data. So it's not a training process as such, right? It's just an algorithm that pieces together common combinations of letters. And this is what it looks like. And then based on this list, we make the embeddings by doing this step of, well, one hot encoding and then one dense layer. Then, yeah, again, we have this example you can test.

## The Tokenizer Playground (54:45)

Some text and you'll see how they will be tokenized. And these are the integers of basically the number of the token. And you see, well, if I use GPT-3, I have to choose this one and they will be some IDs. But if I choose a different model, I want to actually do Claude, then the numbers are different. It's just the way it's made. So we have to make sure, of course, we start with the same numbers. So in case of pre-training, then please use the correct one. No, sorry. Yeah, using pre-trained models, then use the correct one. So pre-training, okay, let's discuss this a little bit because this is something that for many tasks will save you years of work, actually.

## Pretrained embeddings and models (55:33)

So we tried it already for computer vision models. That was very, very useful because there are these open source models that have been trained on a big data set. We can download them for free and then either just use them as they are or we can fine tune into our specific use case. So for images, we saw that layer one was these very small filters and they had kind of super generic shapes like lion or dot or whatnot, which is very composable into these higher order types of filters that contain more specific information. That was nice because then we have a base that extracts very basic features and then kind of step by step we have more advanced features. But then if I want to do anything, then starting from this base layer with very few or very simple patterns always makes sense. I usually will get the same thing if I train everything from scratch. So fine tuning is totally a super efficient thing. So this is always a nice thing to do, including also for your project. But remember, for a project, you also have to do everything from scratch. But you can compare to pre-trained models just to see how well you do and how well you could have done if you started from pre-trained models. OK, so the concept for computer vision we get like there are simple patterns that we can reuse. Typically, simple patterns also apply to our case. We just need to stack them in into different final patterns. Now, the same thing is very much the case for language models. So typically, words are going to be similar in your specific use case compared to other ones. So typically we have the same basic language vocabulary. So if I have embeddings made for a very big and nice data set and I want to make some language model that looks at some specific documentation that I have for a specific project, I don't know. So typically, the embeddings still make very much sense. I just have to retrain the final bit of the model so that I tune it into giving me the answers that I want for my specific case. But embeddings, they are very, very general because words typically mean the same things across different contexts. Unless I have some very specific technical terms, of course, that happen to be different. But we can also solve this by the method we see next week. Then these embeddings, they are things that you can download for many different models or if you can even buy them if you like. So if you want to use the same embeddings, more or less that JetGPT uses, then you can pay for this, upload your text and get these embedding vectors back. Or you can choose an open source model, of course, and start directly from this. But making these or using these embeddings, since they are the first step of your model, they are supposed to be very general and very generic so you can reuse them. So this is a big time saver in many cases.

## N LP resources (59:30)

Some extra resources. Now we learned the technical bit, so let's look a bit on the things that can help us potentially. If we are now using TensorFlow, as most of us are doing, it comes with kind of a text bit that does a lot of the preprocessing that we in any case want to do. So it comes with these things, so we saw in the boxes earlier you can standardize, we call it normalize, it's the same thing. It also comes with these specific subwords tokenizers. So if you want to make your own tokenizer that fits your use case perfectly, then you don't have to implement the algorithm yourself, it comes as part of TensorFlow. And you will also find it as part of other libraries if you want to use something else or you need a very specific type of tokenizer. Well, these different tools, so we don't go too much into it in notebooks, but they do exist, so we know that there's a lot of work on language models, right? So there are many of these things that we can reuse the implementation from different libraries. So now, well, not too many chose to do text-based stuff for their project, but some did, and that's going to be super exciting. These things can be helpful to get started. But we can mention one thing, which is a library or organization, actually, kind of a transition between those two that you might have heard of with a rather silly name, Hugging Phase. But this is one of the biggest sources of language models as of now, actually, quite a lot of different models.

## Hugging Face (61:24)

So if you go to Hugging Phase, maybe you have seen, maybe you haven't, but they have really loads of different models for you to download and test. So if you have the opportunity to run large language models locally on your machine, then it's going to be very cool. So this is something you can test, but you can do anything really on Hugging Phase. So it has a silly name, that's how it is, but it's really kind of the source of a lot of stuff, including data sets, if you want, different websites. Actually, you can build here if you like. So if you want to do deployment as part of your project, which is super encouraged, then you can also put this here for free. I just want to show you the models page. So if you have been paying a little bit attention to large language models, you'll probably recognize many of those that are listed, even though the text is a little bit small. So Quan, do we know this? Yes, one of the big open source large language models, Chinese, I think, along with DeepSeq. But you can look up any, so DeepSeq, for instance. Do we have their models? Yes, absolutely. And you can download it here, and there is also a nice list of how you would like to run it. So run it in Colab even, or different providers, or this separate library that you can use if you like. We don't really use it in the notebooks because it's kind of specific to this, but it's a very popular library as well. So other models you like. Google has this one thing called Gemma, don't they? This you can try. Which are the ones? Yeah, any case. So open source models, you will find them here and can download as you like and run with any tool. GPT models from OpenAI, they are closed source, so you won't find them except for one, which is called GPT-OSS, for open source something something. If you want to have the joys of running a large language model, run a chatbot basically on your own computer, then very easy, press one of these. Maybe you want to run it on this tool or some other different so-called local apps for you to run it on your own hardware, which can be a fun thing to do. So access to open source models, if you want to compare your stuff to it or just run it yourself, free yourself of your chat GPT license and run everything yourself. It's actually quite simple and it's getting more simple by the day, so absolutely something to look into if you're interested.

## Other uses of embeddings (64:48)

Now, so have established embeddings are cool. Can we embed other things rather than just words? Well, yes, let's embed words first and notice that also if you use Google, for instance, maybe you have occasionally used Google, most people have, you'll see that many of the matches you get are not kind of word by word exact keyword matches, but there are similar stuff. So how does Google know which stuff is similar? So if you search for, I don't know, some video game, you'll probably get results for similar video games. And that is because of the exact same thing, just a it's older than language models, which has a different name. They call it Vector Search instead of embeddings, but it is it is really the same thing. So instead of typing exact keywords, as you would in a relational database to get results, if you Google stuff, you get also similar things. And it's based on the exact stuff that we that we just saw that they for your search, compute this thing and rain ranks your results by by similarity. Or well, either this or this, I don't know, but one of them at least. So, yeah, we can call it Vector Search, if you like, but it is really embeddings also these. So putting stuff in a vector space and then looking at if they point basically in the same in the same direction. So then you get similar results. So absolutely a very big thing. This doesn't just apply to large language models, but it's basically a necessity for for like large language models. So you've probably been exposed to this many, many times.

## Embed everything (66:51)

But, yeah, let's see if we can embed other stuff so we don't just have text, right? We know we have different data sources, but we can look at text in different formats, maybe images, audio, and so on. And this is the trick to if you have, well, either chattypity or different apps, you know that you can input, you can take a photo and input this. You can say generate the photo and all these things. You can talk to it. And we call this multimodal types of models where each mode is a kind of format of data. So text or image or voice or whatnot, three different modes. So often you'll come across this multimodal thing. So it's a model multimodal. It means it can operate on different different types of inputs and outputs. But then we know, OK, so all inputs have to become numbers in a way to be or to be inputs to our model. So how do we make reasonable numbers out of everything? And the trick is really embeddings. So look at this a little bit now towards the end. So if we can embed stuff into a big space where relation or rather neighboring stuff has a similar meaning, then we sort of unlock the trick to do things like generate an image of a horse. Well, this I can do because I've embedded the concept of horse at a certain position. So I just need to go there and find it. And then I can go from text to image and so on. So if I can stuff everything into my big super useful abstract vector space, then I can transition between these data types. And that is absolutely very powerful and cool thing.

## Sentence embedding (69:00)

So we can look at some things. This is not really useful for anything else other than research, but it's still cool for research. The so-called universal sentence encoder, which would take them not the individual words per se, but even the full sentence like this and then do the magic of this orange box. That is to make embedding spaces. So just numbers, right? And then you can look at similarity, either cosine or Euclidean similarity, and see which types of sentences are close in my embedding space. And then question one, how old are you? Question two, what is your age? Seems to us to mean the same thing. And the model also says, yes, semantics, aka the meaning is more or less the same. While a different question, your cell phone looks great. It's not the same meaning as how old are you. But then my phone is good or my cell phone looks great. It's not exactly the same thing, but pretty close. So embedding entire sentences by their meaning is absolutely possible. And we get this embedding space that has relations in terms of the meaning of different things. So closely spaced things mean the same or less.

## Image embedding (70:42)

So entire sentences we can do. How about images? Yes, absolutely. I can also put them in some embedding space. And that is very nice, because then we can ask the model. So here is a bird. What would be similar birds? Now I see if I constructed my example a bit silly, because most of them are kind of similar looking birds. Maybe except for this one. Definitely not birds. But it has the same properties. So it's spaced in a different direction. But you can still put it in kind of the neighborhood of birds, I suppose. It's a bat if you're wondering. But these other ones share some properties, but they're also different. So this one has some color, this one does not. So they are different, but the same depending on how you formulate your question. And that is a nice thing with embeddings, again. So depending on how I move about, I get different properties of the data points that are in there. But OK, so can I take an image and drop it directly into some embedding space? Well, no, not really. So the thing is, as we know, each separate pixel doesn't really have a meaning as such. You need many pixels to actually get the pattern. And from this pattern of neighboring pixels, then you can say this was a bird or something else. So just taking the pixel values themselves and making a vector is not the best thing. But we, of course, we know this already because we did this. We have convolutions and they extract patterns. And towards the end, we get numbers out. And these are even in a vector format. So stuffing an image through my trained CNN will give a vector out. And this happens to be a vector. So I can use it as a point in a vector space. So actually to do this, do these multimodal machine learning models, we actually know pretty much of the basics for how to obtain the position in the embedding space. Generating images on the other hand, so going from embedding space and kind of backwards in this thing. That is a whole different story. But we'll look at in the last part of the course how you can also do this. But at least the one direction going from image to some embedding, this I can do. And if I want to do classification, what did we in fact do? Well, we put in different images, extract the patterns and then say yes or no to is it dog, is it birds, blah, blah, blah. So we make a decision. But if I just remove the decision parts, then I'm going to place these different images in different directions. And instead of drawing a line like so and say birds and different birds, if I just skip this, then I have my embedding and I can ask stuff like are these similar? Because after all, classification is asking are these things similar? You're just doing it in a very concrete way, saying is this example similar to this example? And then your algorithm will say, yes, they are both birds. But you can rephrase the question a little bit and say like, but how similar exactly are these? What's the distance between them? And then you're asking something else, but we do know how to compute the answer. And then you can do all sorts of different funny things. So if I get a picture in to my bird classifier, which was not the birds, then maybe asking is it birds type A or is it bird type B? It doesn't really make sense, but I can ask, is it similar to birds? And then, well, yes, it flies. It's kind of similar, even though it's not the same thing. So even though my classifier might break down, I can still extract patterns and do kind of operations of similarity on these images. So again, what did we do? We took some numbers in, made them better numbers, and then we can ask questions to this list of numbers. And not only say are these the same class, but also say are these related or are they distant? So very cool. Just learned how to make them new questions to answer different types of things on basis of what we just did.

## Audio embedding (75:45)

Okay, so if I can do text, if I can do images, maybe I can do audio as well. Absolutely. We know how to operate on sequence inputs like so. If you tried one, well, this is an actual open source tool from OpenAI, which is called Whisper that does transcription, which is a super nice tool if you're doing stuff like, I don't know, interviews and so on. Or you want to have a voice recognition car, voice recognition algorithm type of thing that you might have for your phone or for a car or something. You can do the same thing. Run it through fancy stuff that we'll see. Make an embedding space then based on similarity and the embedding space. Do whatever you need to do. Convolutions work, LSDMs work, these sequence things, they do work. But to make the best type of model, we'll add some tricks next week, which I'm kind of dripping some information in here so you can subconsciously reflect a little bit on what we want to do. So this is a heavy operation in the end to make this transformer. Okay, you'll notice that for a language model, it has some embedding and a speech model also has some embedding. So the first step is still kind of the same, taking your data, making useful numbers where related stuff makes sense, essentially.

## Latent spaces (77:30)

And that places us now in the position to make a definition, again, of things that we call latent spaces. And again, it's an abstract thing, but this is basically where our good numbers live. So if I have a model and I have different layers, inputs and then some hidden layers and classification layers and so on, then calling it, well, in the past, we used to call it the hidden layer, which is kind of a silly name in a sense. Let's rather call it the latent feature space because these are my better numbers that I can use to make better decisions rather than just the inputs. There are many ways of obtaining the latent feature space. If you do deep learning, you will get many of them automatically for free, each for one layer. The point is, again, as I keep rambling about, we want to make better numbers in sequence. So these latent spaces will iteratively be better the farther along the model that we go, but also more specific, of course. So again, if we want to save ourselves a lot of time and a lot of work and just take a pre-trained model and do what we call transfer learning. So it's trained on one thing, but we want to do something similar but different. Then we can guess that latent spaces early in the model are very general. We can reuse them while towards the end, they are very specific to one task. So this is where we want to go in and make the change. So if you have come to the same data source in, we can assume that a model that is trained on one thing has picked up on features that will be useful for also solving different types of tasks. So pre-training is useful for different things. So we can say, OK, I want to do deep learning on this thing. The thing is something where I have very little training data. So maybe I want to do, I don't know, some kind of medical thing, maybe. So I want to, from x-ray images, detect cancer. Very obviously a very good thing to do. But there are a few people who have cancer of different specific types. Cancer is, after all, rather rare, luckily for us. So if you want to go and make your cancer detector, then of course you need training data. But then a few people actually have cancer. So you're kind of in a squeeze where it's hard to make a model that doesn't completely overfit. But what can you do? Well, a few people have cancer, but many people take x-rays. So you can train your model on different x-ray images. You can set up everything or you can evaluate how well it does. And then you can say, OK, this final output says, should say yes or no to cancer. But this kind of first or second latent space, it's still kind of a general x-ray feature extractor thing. So I can reuse it. So all the parameters in this first bit, I'll just let them be. And then I tune only the few parameters I have in the final parts. Then I can solve my problem without all this tricky business of overfitting and so on. Just to go straight ahead, train on something else, fine tune it, as we say, on the task that you actually want to solve. And then we have a super nice model that is able to solve this problem without overfitting, because we actually only changed a small part of it. So this we can do. And also the second thing is, OK, maybe I want to solve some problem, but I don't really have. So maybe I don't have the training data, but I also don't really have the time to do it. Then I can take an open source model, do the same thing, let somebody else kind of pay for the training. And then I just reuse it because this is how open source is meant to be. And then I can solve my other type of problem. So maybe even I don't have to do the pre-training part. I can let this be done on some different task. So type of thing, which is absolutely very common for language models because they take so much time to do the pre-training bit. So if I want to make a state-of-the-art language model, I need a big computing center and I need a month, more or less. And it's going to cost me millions. So for all intents and purposes, it's going to make my life a lot more simple if I start from something that is pre-trained.

## Pretrained embeddings (82:51)

So again, for the project, you have to also train from the beginning, just mentioning it again with these rules. But embeddings, they are available for you if you want to start from there. And there is a leaderboard for it where you can check which embeddings perform best on a variety of predefined tasks. So you can check this from time to time and find one which is both good and small enough to fit your hardware, for instance. The updated one looks like so. Yeah, there's a long list on how they perform and also this plot is, I don't remember. But if you want to start from these pre-trained embeddings, you can download them and find one that fits your needs.

## Measuring embedding quality (83:42)

So final bits. How do we measure this embedding quality is done by textual similarity, as we call it, where we have some tasks where people have, humans have looked, are these similar? Yes or no? If so, how much? And then you can basically compute similarities from your model and see if it solves this. So test sentence, this new movie is awesome. And this will get, if you put this in your embedding model, so to say, you get vectors in embedding space. And then you can check, are they close to what they're supposed to be? So new movie is awesome. New movie is great. If they are very close, then good. You kind of solve these tasks. If it's rather gives you movie is awesome, relates to dog plays in the garden, then not so good because these are not related per definition where a definition is given by people who looked at this. So different of these tasks. And you can, if you have specific tasks you need to solve, you can choose the one that that matches what you need.

## Contextualised word embeddings (85:00)

But then we will end for today on one kind of obvious problem. So maybe you kind of guessed this already. So if I do my big embedding space, then I say, so this word is in relation to other words by so. But some some words have two meanings, right? Consider this. So you are right about something, then this means you are correct. While make a right turn, if you drive a car means go the opposite of left. But it's the same exact word, right? It just means completely different things. So how do we then kind of get the meaning? How do we get the context of the entire sentence, which allows us to select the meaning? And this will be the big thing for next week. So we now have established embeddings. They are awesome and they have the semantic meaning that we want. But some words have different meanings. And how do we solve this? And this I will let you think hard and thoroughly about for next week. And then we try to solve it on Monday.
