# attention and transformers and lecture 16: transformers for natural language processing
Okay, finally, we are back with the week of technical difficulty getting to an end, which is a bit annoying because this week is the fun stuff, right, of learning about transformers, which is definitely the most important neural network architecture to know about these days. It's the stuff that powers ChattGPT and the like, but let's then, yeah, didn't get too far yesterday, so we can cram both lectures in today should be fine. Then we will keep repeating this for, well, not repeating, keep adding on this for another two weeks. So next week, I am away, so Tarja will be back as the guest star and take lectures one day Tuesday, and then we go a bit beyond the book, in fact, for the last week and look at how we could use these transformers for other things and some special cases that might be interesting to us. So technically, we sort of end in the book on chapter 16, but then we want to add a bit of stuff that could be interesting for us, and then we do the Easter week, and then we do some project work, and then we get back to the final bit of generative AI, well, technically, we will do generative AI also next week, but then towards the end is more generating images and other things. And that is basically it, and then we have some repetition to do, and then it's the exam, but then again, let's remember, remember April 30 is the deadline for submitting the project work. Okay, that was the calendar, so let's get into the business of transformers. So transformers, as I mentioned, is one type of architecture of neural networks, but it's based on one important concept, which is called attention. And we'll start with this. So this was what the only thing we got to see yesterday.

## Sequence-to-sequence learning (2:30)

Let's skip this and look a quick bit on this business of sequence to sequence learning, which we will use to motivate a little bit on where we want to go next. So chapter 15 is it in the book, we'll start with this, a translation task, in which case it's kind of obvious for us that if we want to translate a sentence like this, we sort of have to look at the entire thing before we get going with making the outputs. So if I do it like just word by word, it's going to sound quite silly, because in some languages, words are shuffled a bit, we might need more or fewer words to express the same thing. So we want this encoding and decoding business was kind of abstract concept, but it applies to all basically all machine learning, so it's nice to use these words to discuss how things work. So we encode it into some format where we can do the machine learning bit and then decode it into our output sequence. This we know how to do, at least using these RNNs, for instance, the recurrent neural networks, they were able to output the sequence. So we can take our targets language in, and then we have to look at each token and then keep updating our hidden states and so on in these types of models. And then the hidden state kind of has to carry the entire meaning until we successfully have translated the entire sentence into an output. And that is nice, and it gets even more nice if we remember the business about embeddings. So embeddings were super important, and they help us get quite far in all these language tasks. And we'll see, we can also use it for other things, they are generally super nice. So one simple way to solve this, we'll test it in notebooks as well, let's just do the embedding. Okay, fine. And then LSTM, for instance, and then we have to return sequences, so we get all the sequence output and then set the end of this would be kind of a minimal working example to do some simple translation tasks. Okay, so we know some things about these RNNs. So everything kind of the entire meaning has to be squashed into this hidden state or the internal states that works for a while, but it doesn't really scale all that well. And then we also remember, okay, so these RNNs, we have to do everything in a loop. So also the training is a bit time consuming, we can't really parallelize stuff that well on a GPU, which we like to do. So we have two kind of limitations to this. It does work, absolutely, but it's maybe not optimal, right? So this hidden state needs to somehow be capable to store all the context, that is a bit tricky. So it's usually it's limited to these kind of short sentences like this. And also we remember that once we get into very long sequences, like passing 20, 40, 50 ish of tokens, then also they seem to kind of keep forgetting the stuff that came in in the beginning. And that is kind of in some sense, it's a feature and not a bug. If you look at time series, for instance, then we had an assumption that we usually expect the most recent stuff in the sequence to be most important for the future. But for text, it's maybe not the best assumption, then we usually want to remember the sort of entire context for this to work. So in general, we get some in RNNs, they do absolutely work, but typically we are limited in practice to looking at relatively short texts. And for translation, it's kind of okay, because you can take one sentence at a time, but usually it gets better if you can remember everything, right? So if I want to translate some stuff, and it's maybe a long document, then it makes sense for the model to somehow pay attention to the fact that we are discussing topic X and not topic Y, and words can mean different things, right, in different contexts. So maybe we can do better than this. And turns out, yes, we can construct this magnificent beast of a flowchart that will allow us to specifically remember context a lot better. So this thing is from a research paper in 2017, so it's been around for a while, but it took some time before we sort of managed to make it work properly. And now it do, and now it works really, really well, and we kind of use it for basically everything at this point. So this is the transformer thing. And while we will sort of dissect this flowchart in a little more detail on the coming slides, we can sort of see at least at the bottom, we have some inputs. So that will be the stuff that we, the data we operate on. And then in the training business, also, we need some targets. And these are called outputs in this case, but we'll get into what these will be. And then we recognize, first thing we do, embeddings, embeddings are the solution to

## Attention is all you need (8:45)

many things. So we start with this. So embeddings we know, and then we do all this complicated stuff. And then at the top, out comes an output. But notice, actually, it's output probabilities, which is important. So not really a surprise to us, also, when we did image classification, for instance, we did technically get floating point outputs, right, which we could think of as a probability. So this image is 0.99 score of being a cat, right, hints us to this being a good classification of a cat. But then it could also be 0.01 percent dog, or well, not percent, but just 0.1 percent dog that would be. So that's also a score for it being something else. So we're kind of used to this, but we have to think a little bit more about this when we get into the business of generating text. So this thing, as it stands now, can be used for generating text. So first, we want to classify, but in the end, we want to make a chat GPT clone, right, that is able to actually answer questions that we might ask it. And then we have to deal with the outputs, and that's going to be, yeah, making these outputs will be the topic for Chapter 16 next week. But on this week, let's try to understand this big thing.

## Vector embeddings (10:27)

Last week, we sort of left off with the thing. So we had these nice things, which are embeddings, so we can take some words, tokenize them. So now they are not really words, they are tokens, but often those are the same. And then we put it in some vector space. So actually, they point to a point in this space, and if I make it in 3D only, that's a bit limiting, but then at least we can visualize it. So we looked at this big thing that I showed you with the embeddings of all of GPT version 2, and here we have a silly example.

## Transformers: Basic idea (11:09)

Then we had the thing, right, so one word can mean different things in different contexts. So how do we solve this? So the embedding was made kind of once, and then we reuse it. So embedding was very nice, because similar words are grouped in similar areas of this big space. But if I take my tokens and run the embedding after training, then weights of the embedding layers are fixed, right? So then every time I put my text into an embedding, then one token will get the same position. So consider these two ones. So you are right, meaning you are correct, for instance, then right would be positioned at this spot in the embedding. Then I can input some other tokens, like turn towards right, meaning the direction, right, so opposite of left, and that is something else, right? But still, it would end up in the same spot, because we run the same one embedding layer. That's maybe a bit unfortunate. So we wanted our model to understand the entire context. So if I have a long document, or at least some text, then it should be optimal, of course, if the model somehow can pick the correct meaning of these words, depending on all the other words. So looking at, doing the translation, for instance, just single word by word, by looking at the dictionary, doesn't really make for natural text, does it? And it can also be just plain wrong. So we have this after the first input layer of our model, but we want something more, and here comes the business of these transformers. So the basic thing is, look at all the other words, and then change these positions accordingly. So do a kind of transformation, so we're still going to be in kind of a similar dimensional space. But now, this thing, this use of the word right will point to this position, because it's affected by these other ones, but here, actually, it's pointing on this position, So different semantic meaning, because it's a different point in this embedding space. So now it means something else. We can see, okay, so these points are absolutely different, right, and that is, by construction, the stuff that we want. So somehow, we want to start with these embeddings that are absolutely great, but they are confusing for similar words, and then we want to update it. And then you can say, okay, maybe we can do this several times in a sequence, and then all of a sudden, we have a deep learning model that will also turn out to be a good idea. So we start out with the embedding, and then we make some new representation, which is better. And that is, well, again, the entire concept of everything we have done in the course, We take some inputs, and then we transform it to some representation that is just better at solving the task. So this is the basic idea. These embeddings in, something better out, and then based on this, I can use the other tools that I know and make good decisions, either in terms of generating new text or in terms of making classifications. Okay, let's take some of the the dirty details as well. This is still kind of saying the same thing, then we'll introduce how we get to this point, so to say. Again, so technically speaking, what we're doing, we're taking this sequence again, so we're operating on sequences, and they happen to be vectors now with being pointing in somewhere of some direction in this space, which has the dimensionality of them, length of sequence n, and then also the number of numbers that go into the vectors, so to say, which was my choice as a programmer, how big of a embedding space do I want. So this will be, so n will be like the number of, if I can select it, maybe not, oops, okay, but n, in any case, is the number of tokens, then, so length of my sentence, basically, and then d is for a big modern model, it's 3,000 something, but can also be in like the hundreds, but something like this, something that is difficult to plot, but still works because vectors behave similarly for all dimensions. So that was our sort of start, and then we want to compute some relation between these. So all the words that I have, I want them to affect each other in a way, and then luckily we know how to do this because we, yeah, last week showed how, yeah, you can similarly just take the, either the distance between these vectors, that's one thing, or you can take this so-called cosine similarity, which looks at the angle between vectors. And then we remember, so okay, if the vectors point kind of in the same direction, they are likely to be meaning the same thing, and if they're completely opposite, they mean opposite things, and so on. So take this relation somehow, and then use that to transform these vectors, and then they will be in the same dimensionality of this output space, so it looks very much the same, it's just like they point in slightly more meaningful directions, and then this is somehow better. So the big thing then is, so point one here, this we already did by this embedding layer, so this is fine. Yes, computing this relation, this we have to do, takes a bit of math to do it in a way that preserves good numbers, to put it in that way, so we don't have some numbers that either go to zero or explode as usual, and then we have to also accomplish this transformation, and this is the task for today. Then finally we have our new representation, and then we can do whatever we like, we can repeat this, because the dimensionality is the same, we can just do it again, or we can add our final classification layer, for instance, and solve some task. And this is basically this list of points, it's what's been given the name of attention or neural attention, and we're going to see it's kind of like attention as we know it from other contexts. But we want our model to pay attention to the correct things, basically.

## Self-attention (18:57)

So let's again choose some word that has multiple meanings, so station, for instance, can be different things, so you can have petrol stations, you can have meteorological stations that record weather, or you can have train stations, or you can have radio stations, or TV stations, and whatnot. So if I want to classify text about some kind of station, then I have to know basically what kind of station it is, and in all these examples it's not specified, right? It's not like the word in front says exactly what it is, okay, in this case the word in front says exactly what it is, but not the other ones. So for this one I somehow have to see that petrol is important here, for this one I have to see that train is important, and for this one I have to see that BBC Radio is important, and also have to understand exactly what BBC Radio for is in order to understand this thing. But if we read the entire thing and don't, for instance, look at just single words at a time, then we can understand the context of this thing. And of course, the longer the sentence, or if I have a complete document, for instance, it can be that I have to look at a different sentence, or even at a different section of the document in order to figure out this context. So this in fact is a pretty tricky task, and this is something even kids or even adults sometimes can struggle with to construct this context. So this will be kind of our main task, and this we'll try to solve now. So I can mention, so if you read the book, well, when you read the book rather, this chapter 15 will focus on a translation task, which is nice to understand attention, but we will try and focus instead just to complement a bit on a different thing, which is rather self-attention, as it's called. So taking one sentence and then figuring out the attention mechanism just on the basis of the one sentence, and then we can do classification or whatnot, but we can also compute this attention between the translation of the sentence, for instance, which is done in the book. So both things are basically the same, but it's two different ways of looking at it. So let's look at it in the self-attention way first here, and then you read about it in the translation setting rather in the book. So example sentence, let's do this one, train left the station on time, and let's see how our model can sort of infer context in this example, and then try to figure out what exactly this station is all about. And here we have the, this is actually from the previous version of the book. It's been removed for some reason, but you can also Google it if you like, but here we have the entire mechanism from getting from the inputs, tokens, to our new representation and we'll do it step by step.

## Self-attention: The steps involved (22:36)

Let's do first thing. So sentence comes in, these are the words. Let's say now that each word is one token to be, to make it more simple. Typically these words are short enough that they will be just one-to-one with tokens. So that's fine. But then we have to do the embedding first. So take tokens in, compute. So each box here is a vector then. So that is this one, train goes to this vector. So this long box just, yeah, sort of shows that there are many numbers that go into this vector. So for instance, the interesting one for us is station and that goes in, in this one. So just highlighted it in red to show that this is the position in the sequence and this position is a vector, so there's a lot of numbers in it. So embedding vectors, step one, that's fine. So we at some point have a trained embedding layer and we can do this step. Then comes the business of computing attention scores, as we call it. So now we want to figure out if I sort of match the words in the sentence with themselves, which words affect the meaning of the other ones. So basically starting at the, is it related to itself there? Well, yes, 100%. It's the same exact words. So this is why we get a diagonal. So if I put the sentence like in this direction, in this direction, then diagonal will always be kind of maximum impact because it's the exact words. So that's not the most interesting thing. The most interesting thing is when we try to look at, yeah, let's see, on this axis first, if we try to look at station and then see which other words is it connected to. So let's look at station then. So station and the, okay, not the biggest score from our computation of this thing. What looks like station and the next one, train, that was a big thing. So apparently train and station has an important relation in this sentence. And how we get these numbers, I will show you now, well, not now, but in very soon. But these are numbers we can compute on basis only of these embedding vectors. So we have the embedding layer and it was trained and everything is fine. And then we can do this business. So station and left is also kind of a decent score. So leaving a station of this type is something that we do. And then the rest is quite small. So they didn't seem to affect us too much, except for the word itself, which is always correlated with itself. So that's not too interesting. Okay, then we managed to compute some stuff on basis of these embedding vectors. And then this station was the thing we were interested in, so we can extract sort of this entire row and just put it as a column instead and it looks like this. So just the same numbers, just extracted only this part, fine. Then we can move on to the next step. So we extracted these, let's call it attention scores. Then we do some math, which I will show. Then if we do it for all of our tokens, then we get what is called the weighted token vectors. So you can imagine that we do this, or we extract all the rows and then we sort of sum it up somehow. And then for each token, we have a new vector. And that was what we showed from the beginning that we wanted. So these vectors are now different than the original ones, but they have become, through the magic of self-attention, they have become context aware. So now we can see that train and station is kind of lighting up, which is important for us. And now we get the new outputs. So the business was basically doing the embedding and then looking at the relation between different words in embedding space and making these new vectors, which are somehow aware of the sentence they are put into. It looks a bit funky, but okay. Let's accept this for now and we can quickly also try to code it up and see how, actually how simple it is in a sense. So let's do it step by step. So this would be not the fastest way you can do this, just maybe the close to the most understandable way. So if we define some function and call it self-attention, and then it takes the text in, it will basically just loop over the, for each of the tokens, it will loop over all the other tokens. And then compute some scores. So I'll just start by assigning it to zero and then filling it in. So this is maybe probably recognized as double for loop, kind of inefficient way of filling a matrix of values, which was what we wanted to do. The score is simply at this point, yeah, it's called tensor dot, which is the dot product of vectors. So dot product of vectors, we remember from math, right? It's also called the scalar product. It's when you take two products and you multiply and then you get one single number out. This relates very much to the angle between vectors, right? So if I have these two as an example, let's just compute some dot products and see really how kind of simple they are. So these are my two vectors, and they look like this into these base. And if I do the dot product, then I take the top one multiplied by the top one, plus bottom one multiplied by the bottom one, and the top one is four and the bottom one is one times zero, it's zero. So when I sum it all up, I have four. So this we remember, right? So if they are kind of pointing in more or less the same direction, I get a positive value. If they are perfectly orthogonal, they point in completely separate directions, then I get always zero, as we probably remember. So if there's 90 degrees, we get zero, and that applies to any dimension as well. So if they are perfectly orthogonal, I always get zero. So pointing in the same direction, it's positive, orthogonal, it's zero, pointing in opposite directions, I get a negative result. This we kind of looked at already, right? So if stuff were pointing in the same direction, if it's kind of in the same neighborhood, more or less, then these somehow mean the same or they are related in some other meaning. And this is basically what we compute, right? So these point in the same direction, so they are related somehow. These are 100% unrelated, so a score of zero. And these are apparently even opposite things, point in completely opposite directions of my embedding space. So that's kind of simple, right? So these are just my scores. These are my attention scores. Just looking at if they are related, sorry, or not. And then, okay, so I don't want any kind of numbers, we have to scale it a little bit. So let's scale it by the input length and apply a softmax so that all my scores are between zero and one. So it's always nice to have numbers in this fixed interval because then I don't have values that all of a sudden go to infinity and all these kind of things. So this will be my scores. Score between zero to one is kind of relatable, right? So either you are giving a neighboring token a high score or a low score, and then you just compute the new representation by taking vectors and multiplying by these scores and in the end, summing up. So you can study this afterwards if we like, it's not always that easy to sort of internalize this on the fly. But if you believe that this was what we accomplished with this piece of code, then that's all good. So vectors in, relates all the different words, new vector out, and this has built in the relation between the different words. So this station is now affected by the fact that there is a train that increases the score of this station being a train station, more specifically, even though the train parts was a completely different spot in the sequence. So in fact, if I had computed this matrix and train was kind of in the beginning of a super long sentence, then this doesn't matter at all. The position doesn't matter at all when I compute this matrix, only the relation between these two words. And that is super nice. So if I have a long sentence and the train part is kind of hidden away towards the beginning or something, really doesn't matter. I will pick up on this train in either case and use it to influence the representation of station so that I know this is a train station. And then, already at this point, you can maybe think, okay, I can take a chat GPT and I can upload an entire book and it still figures things out quite nicely. But then this dimensionality seems a bit funny, right? So if I want a matrix that has kind of this axis is the length of a book and also this axis is the length of the book, then it ends up being a pretty big matrix, right? And that is absolutely the case. And this is why, for instance, RAM prices are now through the roof because these text models, they need really a lot of memory to fit this big attention matrix into memory so we can do the computation. Then there are, well, of course, tricks to store this in a nicer representation in memory. This is a bit beyond us, but then, yeah, if you are concerned by RAM prices, then this is the culprit, this matrix right there, at least one of them.

## The query-key-value model (35:06)

So this we did. Then let's do one little thing before we take the break and then try to assemble the complete transformer thing right after the break. So, yeah, sorry, I may be going a bit fast, but you are also quite clever. So this should be fine, of course, also read the book about this. But then, okay, so let's have a look again on this output that we computed. So we made some pairwise scores between two and two words, and then we just made all the possible pairs, right, and just looked at, okay, train, was it related to station? That was one pair. Train, was it related to time? Not so much. And then we just computed this for all possible, yeah, did the full combinatorics for the input sequence, right? And then we used this to affect all the vectors in my sequence, and then the output was done. One new vector for each token. And then you can see from this, okay, so the input actually pops up three different times. So we have the original vector, and then it's multiplied by the score, which needs the vector, no, sorry, the sequence, I should say the sequence rather of all the tokens. So it goes in here, it goes in there, and it goes also in here. So we need the same sequence of words at three different points in order to compute this attention thing that we have. But then you can sort of see, okay, maybe we can put it in a different way and say that, well, we are actually doing kind of a lookup thing. If we replace the first one with some values, and then the second one with a query, so asking for something, and then the other one matching it against some keys, then this starts looking a bit like maybe probing a database for something, right? So we have some values, and then we scale them by how well what we're asking for matches what we actually have in the database. So you can also look at it in this way. And there you will also, I forgot to add this, but if we look at the, that was the same thing, sorry. Let me pull this up after the break rather. We can illustrate this with a figure that's in the book, but I forgot to copy in the figure, but we can look at it right after the break when you have reflected a bit upon this thing. So we can sort of take in what we know from, it's kind of information theory, right? Query for a text for something, for instance, and returning matches that are scaled. So it looks a bit like stuff we have in other fields, and this will apply and use this to do the full transformer thing.

## Multi-head attention (38:33)

Because what you can say now is that, okay, we did this attention thing, looks cool, we're able to understand the context, if we're looking at a long sentence, we can understand each word by the context. But then also, did we really do machine learning at this point? So if we're looking back at this thing that I wrote up that computes attention, well then actually at no point is there any new parameters that I need to learn or anything like this. It's just computing relation between pairs of words. So this thing, it was just computation, there was no machine learning at all, really, it was just taking the embeddings, which we had to learn, okay, fine, so that was machine learning, but this attention business was just computing something. So we can notice already at this point that, well, this transformation, it doesn't learn anything. So it's completely stateless, just the same thing every time we run on a certain input. And that kind of lacks a bit, doesn't it? Because we want a model that learns something from this text and is able to compute useful stuff, not only the relation between words, we actually want to output new text, for instance, and similar tasks. So here comes then, we'll end this first hour by this, the kind of key idea from the paper that started it all, is that, okay, we do the exact thing that we showed here, but let's actually allow these three occurrences of the input sequence to be different things. So let's not do exactly the same, but let's fiddle a little bit with these values as well. And this we know how to do, we can just put for each instance a dense layer, typical layer that we know and that we love, and those have parameters, and we can let these actually learn stuff from our training data, and then use this to kind of learn how to do the transformation in different contexts. And you can do this in, we like to, of course, based on computer vision, for instance, to do a lot of pattern recognition in parallel. So we can do this then, many times in parallel, and then we call this multi-head attention for some reason. And then we go ahead, this kind of the output thing that does the attention mechanism, and we have several of them, and then everything gets very convoluted, but it also gets a lot better. So let's, okay, two minutes over, so let's take a little break then, and reflect upon these things, and then meet at 11.17 then, if we take the full 15-minute break. I'm also struggling to understand, because if he doesn't have anything to do with it, then if it's true, then he doesn't have such a bad principle, then it's a lie. So I understand that when he first started, then it's probably not true. It's just like in the future, because he doesn't have anything to do with it. How come you don't have anything to do with it? I don't know. I mean, some of those who have cancer see it as something bad. And those who have cancer, for my part, don't see anything. They show that they have cancer. So I'm not an expert, but that's why I think it's nice to have these bounding boxes where it is. Yes, I liked that very much. But what I agree with the new model is that he finds his own way around cancer. Does he have any knowledge about these things? Do you think I'm positive? No, I don't think so. I don't think he's positive. He's 50-50, because he finds... I mean, he finds his own way around cancer. But... QM people. Can you say that to him? I mean, you know a little bit more about it. I think the problem with QM people is that it also changes, for sure. Johan is also scared of it. Yes, that's true. Johan is also scared of it. Yes, he's scared of it. He's pretty close. Okay, I think we are on time. We can get back to the business of attention. Havano has one good question in the break, which was looking at this matrix. So why exactly? So we have the pair twice. But apparently it only has half score against itself when it's in different positions. But full score against itself when it's in the same position. That's a very good question where I don't have the exact answer. But if they are different, there has to be a reason to it. And as well, at least two possibilities I can think of. The first being that we did one step of transformations already. So that these vectors are in fact... Yeah, but we did a transformation first. So we have done this once. Or the other option is that we added in the position in the sequence to these vectors. Which is a trick that will get towards the end of today. But yes, very nicely picked up. So they should in fact be equal if we did this the same exact way. But apparently there's a difference. And then there's these two possibilities for how it came to be. Okay, so let's say we are able to compute this attention thing. And make a new output vector for each element in the sequence. And we could also see this as the equivalent process where we match our query. So we ask for something and we match it against some available keys. And then use this to scale values in some way, like this. And then I found this image that I kept talking about from the book. That shows the process like so, more or less. So if you ask for the following thing. Dogs on the beach. And then we have some candidates here. And we want to look for the match. First option, so we do have a beach. And we do have a tree. And we do have a boat. So it was some match at least. Against what we're asking for. Well for the second option. So we see on the image we do have dogs. And we do have a beach. We do also have a tree. But we didn't ask for a tree. So it doesn't really contribute to our match. Or again, the bottom one, we have only one of the things we asked for. Like the top one. So it's 0.5 in match. That's more or less how you can visualize these things. So we have the things we need. The components in place to achieve this. Then we did want to add some learning to it. And this comes through adding new layers to the model. Always want to add new layers. Because this is how we manage to change things. And there comes then this big plot. Showing how this so-called multi-head attention works. In here we have these three things that we had. So in the first round of doing this. It's going to be input, input and input. But we allow them to be different. Once we get to new stages in the model. Then, so if we're doing multi-head. Then we have to at least have two elements of this process. And it could of course be many. Often we have maybe 10 or so of these. And then these inputs are just duplicated to each of the ones. So these are three coming in. And I put the exact three to this attention head. And then do the same for this attention head. So they have the same inputs. But they are then allowed to have completely different parameters. So they can learn different things. And that is nice. So attention. We know how to compute to this. And this was this stateless procedure. It always computes the same numbers for a given input. But then we wanted to change the inputs. So before we do the intention. Let's actually put this through one dense layer. The second one. Also through one dense layer which is separate. And also same for the third ones. So these three. They are able to learn something. So they have parameters. And they can learn patterns. But they can also learn them in this configuration. Completely separate things. And this can help us quite a bit. I will reveal this trick. How this helps in a bit. Maybe you can also try to think. Why does it make sense to treat these differently? And then we have what you typically often find in text. That's the Q, K and V matrices. So if you can come across these. Then we're talking about the stuff that goes into the attention computation. Then we compute self-attention. This was just looking at relation between these vectors. And then scaling them. And this goes out. And we just add up with. Well not add. But concatenate into a long vector. Vector with these. That comes from the different attention heads. So this is how it works. To be fair it's getting a bit complicated. But it does work as you will see. And it also makes sense if we try to think. So what did we do for instance for convolutional networks? We didn't usually just take one single filter. Because that can identify only one pattern. But we stacked up maybe hundreds of them. Maybe thousands even. And then these can identify different patterns. And then combining different patterns. That was a nice thing. Because cats have some features that dogs don't have. But dogs have some similar features. So we can reuse the filters. But then just adding up which filters did we see an activation in. This is what helps us make a decision on how to classify stuff in an image. So identifying many different patterns is a good thing. And for this reason we want to have multiple attention heads. That can learn different patterns in their inputs. So I will do this thing many times. Just like our convolutional networks. We just stack them towards the end. And then go to the next step. So this would be then one layer of doing the multi-head attention. And then we can add new layers equal to these on the top. So it's kind of in a network structure again. Because it's composed of sub-layers and so on. So let's rather talk about this as an attention block instead. So that is maybe the most common to talk about this as one block rather than a layer. But still the lines get a little bit blurred. Because we have inputs and outputs just like a layer does. It's just that we do several operations inside of this one. These are where we learn stuff. And these remaining ones are just operations that do the same thing all the time. But here is where the learning sort of happens. Because these have parameters. And then we can get a little technical on the details of these matrices. So again I think I will not have this on the exam. But it doesn't hurt still to just see it once. So let's look a little bit again on the shapes and the sizes of these different matrices. So we already said that from the get-go I have to define a dimensionality of my embedding space. Could be some hundreds, could be three thousand. These are reasonable numbers. And then I have the length of my sequence that I allow to take in. And that could be for a smallish model like the ones we train. Maybe take a couple of hundreds of tokens at a time. For convenience this will be kind of our data matrix. So usually we call our data X. And we have done a couple of times I think. So still let's just put it as X. Because then it's a matrix. So number of elements and then the number of dimensions. So it's a D by N matrix then. And then we can start to look. So how many parameters are we going to need for this thing? So each of these are then these matrices. And then we want to apply these dense layers. Separate ones for each. So what we call then or what people usually call Q, K and V matrices. Are just data in and then multiplied by the parameters. So the weights of the separate dense layers. So then if you look at the matrices here. You're going to see that this ends up being dimension D times D. And the D was the number that I chose. So this I have to say at the beginning. I choose this to be 3072 I think. If you're open AI then you made this choice. So this gets pretty big pretty soon. And we want three of these and then we want multiple attention heads. So we get some factor of that again. So we're ending up with quite a few parameters in the end. But parameters is where the knowledge is stored. So this is kind of intentional. We do want to have many parameters because then we can learn many things. Just also needs to pay attention to all the computation in the ends. And then computing this looks like so. I showed it in the code. Let's show it in a function as well. Okay I'm thinking maybe we don't do this exact thing on the exam. But for the exam you still should be able to explain how the attention mechanism works. I said already that we do the softmax because this squeezes everything to be between 0 and 1. So these are manageable numbers so to say. And then to do the scaling we multiply two of these. So these will be the relation between my token vectors. And then I need to do some scaling based on how many dimensions I have. And this is a square root that comes in. Which looks a bit wonky today. So this is the scaling that we're talking about. And then I was supposed to use this to scale my inputs. This V thingy. So then you've seen it. Let's leave it at that. We can also show how you would actually program it in terms of layers. So once you have Keras then you have these dense layers coming out. Q, K and V. And then you want to multiply. You want to divide. You want to do a softmax. And then concatenate and multiply again. So this would be the computational graph for doing one block of attention. So then if you look at it like this. When I wrote it in code it looks a bit silly in a sense. And not super efficient. But laying it out as a computational graph like this. Our frameworks can optimize this quite aggressively. And this turns out to be really fast. And you can also see from this. So this we want to do several times. But unlike the recurrent networks there's no looping. It's just compute the entire thing at once. Multiply matrices. We have accelerators like GPUs that are super efficient at computing matrices. So this is kind of the hardware, or well, the dream to put on hardware in a sense. Because everything here is relatively simple operations. This multiplying and summing and a bit of division and everything is very parallelizable. So this is nice. So in the end we have X coming in. This is the data. Y coming out. And these can be done same dimensions. Which means we can do it again. And we can do it again. And we can do it again. And these outputs will then be ideally better and better in terms of solving our tasks. So in fact, even though it's quite complicated, it's not really too different from the stuff we have been doing all year. And then for a little visualization, I think I added this as notebooks as well. But we can go in in these networks. And let's see if we can zoom in properly. No. Let's just look at it like this. We can go in in the model and visualize this attention business and then see if words are related in the way that we hope that they are. Let's try this. So this is the GPT version 2. The ones that I showed the embeddings for last week. And this one comes with 11 layers. So, well, 11 iterations of this attention business. So I can choose if I want to start at the beginning or the end. And then it comes also with 1, 2, 3, 4, 12-ish different attention heads. So this was state of the art in these years. Always confused me for early 2020s or something. And then I have set it up as self-attention then. So the following very biased sentence. Deep learning is cool. Do you think so? And let's try if we can figure out from this how we should relate different words. Because if you look at it, it's not a super easy task. So we're asking about something like think for you to be able to answer this. Then you sort of have to figure out from context what are we actually discussing here. So think what? Well, think this comes from a different sentence. So you have to be kind of not super smart, but you have to be a little bit literate to figure out how to exactly answer this question. But then we can go ahead and see if my little GPT-2 model is in fact able to do this. Let's choose only one layer. No, sorry, one attention head for simplicity. Otherwise, it gets a little bit confusing. So deep is, well, 100% score against itself as usual. That's not so interesting. But learning is related to what? Actually not that much to itself. It's very much related to deep. So deep learning is a thing and the model knows about it. And it's able to associate these things, which is pretty cool. Then what is something? Well, deep learning is something cool. Points not at is. So it's not the word is that is cool. It's actually deep learning that is cool. So therefore we have slightly higher attention scores for deep learning with relation to cool. So it seems like the model is able to pick up something useful here, right? Exclamation mark points to being cool, apparently. And then OK, let's ask a different question here. So do you so you, for instance, is or how should I frame it? You are here associated to different verbs, both thinking and doing something. So it's mostly related to doing something, which is the verb that you are doing. So in terms of sentence syntax, it kind of makes sense now. So think something, which what are you also doing? Well, you think so, too, should should point that thing. But everything is kind of more or less pointing towards deep learning as well, I would say. You can try this yourself in the notebooks and see if you agree that these associations do in fact make sense. And then we can do this for all different layers. So this one is not doing much useful and these are different patterns. So then again, it's not really mandatory for the model to have patterns that are meaningful to us. So this one is very difficult to see on the screen, but there's a small line between the question mark and the exclamation mark. So this is kind of a punctuation pattern recognition type of thing. So this one is doing something else. You'll notice that all of these are doing slightly different things, which is intentional, because then they can recognize many different types of patterns, which should be should be good. So this one is kind of useless, but this one was very good. This one also does something can be a task for you to try and look through all of these and again for all different layers. So it's a lot of things to figure out if you really want to. But this is kind of shows that even though a big language model, it is in a sense a bit of a black box. So it's very hard to figure out why exactly we get so and so answers from a large language model. But it's not magic, right? The numbers are there. So it's not magic. And I can go and look at the numbers if you like. It's just that, OK, there are very many numbers. So it gets a bit tedious to look through all. So attention is very much something we can relate to, I would say. OK, so we did attention and we have one attention block and we have two different ones.

## The Transformer architecture (66:21)

And that is the main thing. But we still have some elements to put in before we end up at what we call the transformer. So the attention is kind of the mechanism and the transformer is the type of complete model architecture that is able to achieve very good results by using the concept that is attention. And then let's look now at this first block of the big flowcharts that we got from the article that introduces this. And look at some other things we can also recognize from before. So on this flowchart, information, data comes in. And then it goes to the multi-head attention. But there's also this shortcuts going around, which we absolutely recognize from computer vision as a residual connection. Sometimes we call it a skip connection, but most common is residual connection. And these were nice because they allow, even though this is kind of either not in a position where it learned something useful or it kind of gradients broke down or something, it doesn't really learn. Then we still have this flow of information that allows us to keep training the entire model, even though we have issues at one certain stage. So these we know are useful. So we want to do this often. And then having some attention outputs. Okay, stick it in a dense layer again, do this residual connection again. And then we have the output and same dimension and we can keep doing this for as many times as we like. And this is something, well, this is from the original paper. There are different variations, of course, but the core is kind of the same thing. So we do attention, we do the residual connection, and then some number of dense layers on top. So we have two different places, in fact, where we can learn. So the attention business learns, well, should learn, we can say, everything about context of the word we feed in. And then we have one more step. Yet another step of pattern recognition and improvement before we go on. And then can keep doing this for as many times as we like. For GPT-2, it would be then 11 times of this. So we more or less have it. Apart from one little thing that we didn't just yet discuss. Because if I just want to do classification, then this is great. I can understand what all the different words mean in association to the other ones. But we will at some point also want to generate text with this thing. And then we also have to take into account that, okay, text is in fact ordered in a not super strict, but a relatively strict manner. So words have to come in a certain sequence, they can't be just jumbled. But then we have the issue. So I said it was good, but maybe it's also bad. That this thing computes the same scores, no matter how I shuffle the inputs. So if I shuffle about these different words, it goes in the matrix. But it's always these combinations of pairs, right? It's going to be two and two words. And there was nothing kind of position dependent in how I computed this. So if I just jumbled all the words, it's going to be the same thing. Because, well, context depends on just the presence of words and not really yet the position of words. So on one side, very good. I don't really have to care about sequences, but also, okay, kind of bad because language always comes in these sequences. So we have to reintroduce somehow the fact that words come in a sequential order and that the ordering matters. And here comes then maybe kind of the disappointing thing. So this is beautiful in a sense. And the transformer is great, does nice things. We see that it makes sense. This thing is optimized for learning, has many parameters, all good stuff. But we didn't really put in the position of these tokens anywhere. So we have to put this back in. And it's a bit, it's not lovely, maybe theoretically speaking, but it does work. So let's stick with it. So consider again some examples. So maybe I read a restaurant review. It says the food was bad, not good at all, which is completely different from the food was good, not bad at all. But it has the same exact words. So same exact sequence of words is just differently ordered. So if I put this in and compute the attention, it's going to be the same, although this obviously have very different meaning. And how can we do this? Well, we can actually just put into the encoding the position of each words. So when we do the embedding, then we take each words and then we index them and then stick them into a dense layer. So indices are already in place when you do this embedding. So maybe we just do the same exact thing for the position. So I can do an embedding where I take instead of token index, I just take position index, which is going to be one, two, like one, two, three, and so on. So I can also embed the position, which is looking at it in terms of types. It's not really different at all, is it? So we're going to offer two different options. I guess the one you'll find in the book, which is maybe the most common, is to really just take the positions and embed. So if we have the example, then I can zoom a bit.

## Positional Encoding (73:30)

So food was good. Then for each of these tokens, we get a vector, right? So the maps to X1, for instance, food maps to a different one and so on. And I can just say, OK, we're going to do the same thing for position. So position one maps to this embedding vector. Just do the exact same thing. Position two maps to this vector. And then in the end, we can just sum them simply. So then we have the final embedding, which points to a place in the embedding space, which has some meaning and also some position built in. And adding vectors gives the same dimensionality, so no difference there. OK, to be honest, it's a bit of a hacky solution, maybe, but it does really work out. So we just mix the meanings of the words and the position of where it's put. And this gives a new vector, which encodes both meaning and position. And from this, we get that if we have this position, and it says good, it's going to be different than if this position said not and then good, for instance. Those would be different meanings. But then also just to mention, so if you happen to be reading the original paper, they do something else. They do what is called sinusoidal encoding, which is also a method to just obtaining this vector. But if you look at it in sine waves that are shifted in phase, then they're going to be orthogonal at different positions. And if you introduce different frequencies, you're going to have a vector in these positions that are different based on the position. And it kind of makes sense, I guess, but it's a bit funky as well. So this is used for, to be honest, I don't know what the newest GPT version does. But this was used in the beginning, but maybe it's a bit more conceptually appealing to do the position encoding step. But both will work in terms of encoding both the meaning of the token and the position of it. So that when you start the new sentence, you can choose the token that has a uppercase letter basically saying not good is different from good and so on. So we're able to make sort of combinations in embedding space or your latent space where things make sense. And still, at least one good thing about this is that it scales quite nicely for any length or embedding dimension that you choose as long as you're able to stuff it into your hardware.

## Computational complexity (76:54)

So final bit, since we are a bit short on time with all this technical fuss, we have to move something to next week. That's fine, I hope. So that will be Tarje, as I mentioned, who is in charge of the lectures. We can just look a bit on the computational complexity of this bit. So I was complaining that this attention matrix, it gets really big. And then I introduce loads of parameters here and there. And we can ask, OK, sounds cool, but is it not maybe completely overkill in terms of parameters that you introduce? And we can look a bit on this. So then if for each attention head that I have, maybe I want to choose like 12, 15 of these. Then I have my dimensionality of embedding space popping up. I have to multiply by three for these different query key value matrices. And then multiply this by the number of attention heads. So there we have many values. And then in the flow chart, it said we should also add dense layers on top. And that gives dimensionality squared for the weights. And also this sum with dimensionality in the power of one from the biases. So from weights and biases, we have this step and this step. And the sum of these will be all the parameters. And that is nice. And I'm also supposed to normalize this thing. Normalization layers comes with two times the number of parameters. So in total, I have, well, immediately when I square something, the number gets really big. And then I add big numbers and I multiply with big numbers. And I do get really quite a few parameters from this. So, OK, fine. But just a pure number by itself doesn't really mean that much. So let's compare it to something. First, if you choose some open source models, you can typically see in the name of it how many parameters there are. So Lama 3.1, I think this came out last year, so it's maybe even superseded by now. But this particular one comes in variants of 8 billion parameters or 405 billion parameters. And these are big numbers. These are kind of fantasy numbers, really. So you need definitely a super computer to run this. 8 billion is something you can squeeze into. If you have 100 gigabytes of RAM, you can probably use it with some tricks. OK, 8 billion typically fine. In any case, these are big numbers. There are tons of parameters, truly, in these language models. We can also say, OK, computing this thing. So how much do we need to compute, really? My formatting got a bit funny, so this square is not really supposed to be a square. I meant to be a big O notation, actually, for this. So I'm supposed to say order of N squared times D for these attention layers. Then N was my number of tokens again. And for these dense layers there, the dimensionality makes a bigger difference. So these are big computations, you could say. But what we need to compare to is how would it be if we had just, we've skipped all the attention business and we had just one big fully connected dense network. How would it then be? Again, sorry for the formatting, but then we would have to do order of N squared times D squared computations. If we did not do the attention business on the transformers and so on, we just did a plain neural network. And you could see these numbers are bigger than these numbers. So in fact, even though we introduce this boatload of parameters, transformers are in fact more efficient once you get into large models than what it would have been to do kind of a more traditional approach. So they take a lot of memory and there's a lot of parameters, OK, which are in fact quite efficient once you get into large models. And turns out, so language is complicated, so we do need many parameters. And then for all our parameters, then it's good to have the most efficient way of encoding things.

## Transformer model structures (82:09)

So a little bit towards the end, I think we'll try to end on usual time still. But we can then have a look at the big thing that we saw from the paper. And this was split in half because they have been using this language that we also have been using for a while, that you have an encoder part that takes your data in and then it transforms it somehow into this abstract latent space where all the magic can happen. And then they also add this decoder part, which goes from latent space to solution of the task. It may be classification or it may be generating text. So for these large language models, typically you want to generate text. Then let's see if we maybe get the chance to have a quick look. So encoder models are useful if you want to do more type of classification things. So if you want to do only kind of the one side, take all your text in and then do some kind of classification. So we had this sentiment analysis thing, which is kind of classification into positive and negative tone and so on. This is where they kind of make sense. And if you read up on notable models from the past, you will find many of these are, or well used to be a long time ago, encoder models that they did the step into into latent space, but then really didn't use this space for much other than classification. Then looking at the modern models. So what we now have as GPT and these big different models that we use for our typical AI tools generating text, they are in fact more on the other side of the flowcharts. So they rather want to do decoding, as we say. So again, terms get a little bit confusing, but we focus on getting useful text out of the model. So then it's more of a decoder thing. Typically we call it and then we generate one word at a time or one token at a time, as you will see. But you could also connect both of them like they did back in the day in the original paper that you want to do these complete sequence to sequence things like translation. So this is just a bit of nomenclature on how these models work, kind of depending on what task we want to achieve with our model after training. And I'm getting just really quick. So it's going to be a little bit quick, but I'll also then not get too technical on the exam, maybe about this.

## Encoder transformers (85:03)

But one type of encoder thing, which does classification, has the funny name of BERT, which is nice for many tasks, maybe not for generating text, but it's nice for all sorts of classification and stuff. And the way it's trained is to take some sentence and then you just remove one of the words. And then you can vary, of course, which of the words you remove. And then you want to predict two things. You want to predict, well, what was, in fact, the word that I took out? And also, was this text, for instance, positive or negative? So then you have to train these transformer layers and you get a very useful representation in the middle, because this is a model that has to know which words were missing and also has to know the solution to the task, so to say. So it's kind of doing two things at once. And it was the kind of very nice historical thing that you can still use. That's very nice in classification settings still. This may be a little bit outstated, but it's a nice example of this encoder style thing. So generating text towards the end of the sentence is not really that useful for because it's trained to find the missing words in the middle. Rather, when we generate text, we want to append words to the end. But this we can do. So then we're in the realm of decoder transformers. And these are the ones that we want for generating stuff. So if I go to ChatGPT and I get asked some questions, I get the text out, then you'll see tokens kind of keep rolling out, which is due to the fact that we predict only the next token. And then we run again, predict the next token, run again, predict the next token. And there are various schemes for solving this that we'll see next week. But then this kind of explains what we saw all the way in the beginning, that the input is one sequence and the outputs are probabilities, or at least something that is related to probabilities. And based on these, we can solve our task. And here are loads of examples of this most popular thing. So all the GPT models are of this type. Llama and DeepSeq and various open source models are of this structure, essentially. And if you want to generate text, this is kind of what you want to do. So I think we can actually get back to this because this ties in quite nicely with the stuff we'll do in two weeks.

## Encoder-decoder models (87:57)

So let's discuss that then. And then we end it now at exactly 12 and meet again with zero technical difficulty, hopefully on Monday morning.
