# tabular data
Week 8 is a week of many topics. Now I stuffed a lot of things into the headline for this week. The idea was to cover a couple of things that could be necessary for us for next week when we start doing the project work. So then, remember, important, submit your topic so we can approve this and then you can get started working. Then also, please vote for these dates for where we want to submit final projects. So there was this link to vote and then this link takes you to the Kano's page where you submit your project topic. So if you know already what you want to do, then just submit and I will approve it as soon as possible. So for next week, we want to do this project week, so no lectures for next week then, so you don't have to meet here if you don't feel like it. So I will be available in the lecture times and in the lab in case you have questions, otherwise you just put in the hours to get your project started. And then after we switch to more text related stuff of natural language processing. So of course, if you want to work on the text for your project, that's perfectly fine. Then we will start scoring this in the next couple of weeks, but you can already now start reading a bit ahead in the book if you want to. So then for this week, I want to cover some stuff that could be relevant to us like some development tools, some different stuff. We'll look at this tomorrow and then also tomorrow go through all of these different rules and the evaluation form and also sort of stuff for the projects so you know what you're supposed to do and what you cannot do and what will give you the best grades. So there's something about an echo, maybe better now, hopefully. Yes, okay, good. And then how far did we get. Yes, so this week then. Wanted to cover one thing which is not in the book that much which is tabular data or columnar data stuff that fits in Excel sheets basically. Often these are things we have to deal with, and it's not always that easy to make it work with deep learning models. So let's look at this today and see how we can squeeze the most information out of tabular data if we have CSV file or Excel sheets or whatnot. And then tomorrow then we can look at some tools and the other rules and do the kind of project kickoff. Then for while I also have of course notebooks for this week, which is one is on basically deployment into a nice web app using some of these frameworks that we have listed so there's two of them and you can try setting up a simple

## Gradio (and Streamlit) deployment (8:24)


## Course notebooks (8:39)

Deep learning based prediction app in Gradio, if you like, or in Streamlit, the other one. That's just one test because this can be something you want to have for your project in the end. And then we also have a couple of then tutorial exercise and also an optional exercise on tabular stuff. Yes. So yeah, the question was where exactly will I be available and I can also post my office room number. So that was the notebook. So have a look at these. And if not, then I think that was what I wanted to say on on the calendar.

## Tabular data (9:33)

And then we can get to the to the actual stuff. So let's have a look on what we typically call tabular data this week.

## This week (9:45)

Also a bit on feature processing or data processing with Keras for such data today. And then if time I think we get time, we'll have a quick look ahead at what is called embeddings, which is one of the main topics for the text parts that we get into later. But we can use it also for other things. So this can be a nice intro to the so-called concept of embeddings. And then tomorrow, OK, I mistyped should be Tuesday, of course, not Thursday. Then we want to look at some development tools. So if you want to run a lot of deep learning experiments, then it's nice to have a way to track the results of all your experiments. So you know what you have been doing and also look at some custom Keras stuff that we looked at actually in Chapter seven already. But just refresh a little how you can use these to guide your projects as best as possible. And then we want to look a bit at the project. So maybe or hopefully you already have good ideas for what you want to do. Otherwise, we cover this a bit again and also some rules and a bit of general info. So it should be clear what we what we are evaluated on once we get to the to the deadline and have to submit this. So that would be the kick of parts done for today.

## (Some) types of data (11:18)

Let's look a bit on data again. So we looked at images, right? That was basically the first thing. And then we also know that or well, we also know from last two weeks about time series where we could reuse some things. And we also added a bit of recurrence, as we called it. And then if you match these two together, you have kind of a video, don't you? And we will start looking at texts and also codes in the next couple of weeks. So code is kind of a special case of text really. So we can reuse a lot of stuff that we will be learning quite quite soon where we will try to make a kind of understand and then make a mini chat GPT thing for both understanding, classifying and then also in the end, generating texts and code can be can be one of these. But then this is a kind of the cool things in a sense. But then we also have the maybe less cool, but still very useful thing of tabular data. So if you do stuff for do a task for any typical business, their data will be in some kind of Excel sheet or a relational database or something that looks basically like these tables. So we had a lot of fun with the more visual stuff of images. But now then for today, let's have a look at some tips and tricks to these basically columns of of data. So tabular data or columnar data, if like basically stuff that goes into a table, right.

## Tabular data (13:06)

And this can be anything if you have health data, for instance, it comes in some table like this. And one thing that is very different from images and time series is that each data point is absolutely not related. So this patient number three to one doesn't share any thing with patient number six or two, just because they're close by. Just really makes sense to treat them as related because it's just like a list. So if you have time series, this would be related because they're close. If you had an image, this would be neighboring pixels and therefore constitute some patterns. But in this case, there is no pattern or relation between the different data points. So each of these are independent or at least we assume they are independent. And that means stuff like convolutions and recurrence isn't immediately very useful for us. So we have to do something else. But looking at this, we can also guess if we need to do different stuff with others of these columns. Some of them are values, age is confined, number of visits to the doctor, for instance, also numbers. So don't really have to do that much. But we notice that we have maybe something called blood type diagnosis codes and also symptoms, which happen to be either classes or texts. And text doesn't go directly into a deep learning model or any machine learning model, really. That means we have to do something to preprocess these things. So here you could say, OK, but these things are text and we have language models. And yes, that is true. And we'll get to it. But we can still do something before we know about language models, because these are often just words indicating something which is maybe related to the diagnosis code, for instance. So let's say age and number of visits and all these integers or floats, they are fine. You can stuff them in a neural network and there's no problem. But other things like categories and texts and labels, we have to do something with. And then just again, so we had these other things and learned about convolutions and stuff, which was super effective. But the assumption then was that if I look at some part of this brain scan, then the neighboring pixels are needed to extract the pattern. But now we don't have this relation between neighbors. Each patient is a separate person. I could rearrange this list and it would still still be the exact same data. While I could, of course, not rearrange the pixels randomly, then it would be really destroy all the information. So we're looking at different patterns this time around, not something that's related or related to neighbors or neighboring data points, but rather correlations in between these different values in the columns and some sort of targets that we may want to extract, like some illness, for instance, we could predict on these things. And then it gets really quickly into the thing of just making nice values.

## Feature normalisation (17:12)

So we learned from the past or basically everything we did was about making nice values in our network. So for images, we kept rescaling pixel values, for instance, to have numbers between 0 and 1. And we had layer normalization and batch normalization and stuff that would help us. And we even had a quick look at optimizers and learned that, OK, I can do adaptive gradient descent, for instance, if I have some features which are squeezed and some features which are not. So training is faster if I basically infer something about the size of the numbers before we get started. And this I already had, right? So the age of a person was some number between 0 and 100, typically, while number of medical visits was maybe something like one, two, three, four. So already a factor of 10 in difference between these numbers, meaning this could be age, which stretches quite a bit. And this y-axis could be a number of visits, which is a smaller number. So if you want to train a bit faster, then maybe we do something with an optimizer that has this adaptive property, so to say, to train a little bit faster. But we can fix this straight away by just rescaling our numbers. So as long as we keep roughly the relation between the numbers in each data point, I can scale them if I like. So if I take all the ages and divide by 10, right, it would be different value numbers. But then there would still be a relation between the age and the other stuff, just that the age is now a smaller number. So if I have age from 0 to 10, and then that's just the factor of 10 in scaling that I applied, then this thing would look more like this thing. And if it looks somehow more normally distributed, it's generally better for us. It's just better numbers, in a sense. So normalization we often do. And then if you followed, well, .158, we did this all the time. The deal is basically this, like we showed once before. If we have nicely distributed numbers going in, we want nicely distributed numbers going out. So if we can maintain more or less the scale of numbers, then this is a good thing. Otherwise, we get into exploding gradients, vanishing gradients, this business that was essentially bad for learning anything in a deep learning model. So we want somehow to obtain this. Just scaling numbers is perfectly fine, and we do it all the time. So what can you do? Starting out, before you actually do any learning, you have your data, and then you want basically something that is more or less like a normal distribution, or a Gaussian, this typical thing, right? That is centered more or less at zero, so mean equals zero, and standard deviation or variance equals one. If it's one, then those two are the same, even though variance is the squared of the standard deviation. And it's very simple to do, so you can just take all the values. So x, in this case, is an array of numbers, so it's vectorized operations. You can just subtract the mean and divide by the standard deviation, and you get something like this. So this is so common that it's many different tools to do it, so maybe you don't really do it manually like so, but do the classic scikit-learn standard scalar, which does exactly this. And then we just have to remember, okay, train, as we call it, the standard scalar on training data, and then apply it to test and validation data without including information from test data into it. And Keras has the same thing. You can implement it as a layer even if you like. It's just called normalization. You can really select this, which is up because I made a link for it.

## Normalization layer (21:57)

So if you want to implement this, you can have this in the beginning, and then you can, instead of scaling stuff first and then training, you can squeeze it all into one nice model using this normalization layer.

## Keras (22:12)

And it says, basically, choose what you want to mean as variance and so on. So two different options for this, and generally just do it. It most likely helps and usually never breaks anything. Well, it always won't break anything. So that's one thing, but then you also often have stuff that is from the get-go,

## Feature transformations (22:39)

not very normally distributed. Like this thing happens a lot for many variables where you basically count something, but it can't be negative. So if you do like, what is the, I don't know, typical income of people in Norway, you can't have negative income, right? So it's bounded by zero. Or if you count what is the number of inhabitants in the different cities in Norway, often you get something like this, that there's a lot of small values and a few big values. And it's cut off by zero, and it looks maybe something like an exponential distribution more or less. And that is not, even if I go and scale it, it's not really going to be a nice normal, right? So I can center it at zero. As you can see, it's centered at zero, and the standard deviation is one, but it's still kind of cut off at one side and then stretches far towards the other side. So this linear operations of multiplying and summing or taking a difference doesn't really change the shape of distribution. It's still heavy on one side, but we want it ideally to have something that looks a bit like a normal distribution. So what we can do, which is often common then, is to take the logarithm, so a log transform of this thing, because then it looks more like a typical symmetric distribution that we like to see. So log transformations, very typical in more traditional statistical modeling. And if we do this, then first do the log transformation and then scale it, and in the end it looks kind of nice-ish. So if this thing on the upper left had been perfect and exponential, then this would also be a, which should then, if I recall correctly, also be more or less perfect Gaussian. It's not really perfect, but still decent enough for our purposes. So this is a nice trick to do, and then also comes with some other benefits and other assumptions that might be correct for your case. But we can maybe discuss this another time, but there are many of these finer points to log transformations of data. So basically have a look at your data as the best advice, I think. If it looks like this, consider making it look like this, which you can do very easily with these transformations. And this you can also, of course, make a part of your Keras model if you like. You can just make a layer that does the log transformation, and then you're okay. But then, well, of course, you have to apply it to only those features which need it. So maybe it gets a little bit technical, but okay. But then, again, in the business of making numbers look nice, so this didn't look too nice, this looks nice. And then this helps us in our big quest towards having nice numbers all around in the model.

## Compare the effect of different scalers on data with outliers (26:15)

But you can also study this in a lot of detail if you go to the Scikit-Learn documentation. It has a long list on comparing different scalars, as we call it then, different feature processing, depending on what your data contains. So often we talk about outliers, right? So you have some data points which are just way off. So there's a mis-measurement or somebody wrote the number wrong or something like this. Depending on how these outliers look, there's different things you can do. So this we'll not cover right now, just saying that there are some tricks in case you have some data set that looks a little bit wonky and then it's difficult to train a deep learning model on it. So one case, for instance, which is, again, this business of scaling features. So maybe you have some data which is nicely distributed along x-axis, but then the values in the y-axis are really small. Then this is numerically a bit iffy, but it looks nicer if we do the scaling, right? Because now it's more spanning, more or less the same values, and doing so is generally just nicer. So it gets a bit funny to talk about nice numbers, but this is where we're at. So making the numbers nice is kind of our job in the end. And then here you can see, so standard scaler is what we typically do and looks like this. You can also take the scale by the maximum and minimum values and it looks a bit like this. And if we study this for a while, we will see that when there are these outliers, I think you can see like this one silly point up there. The presence of these makes some of these scalers, in this case they look the same, but in some cases it breaks down a little bit. So maybe these are better examples. Okay, but then the point is, in general, make the numbers nice.

## QuantileTransformer (Gaussian output) (28:39)

And if your numbers are not nice to begin with, there are different approaches you can choose from listed here that will help the network learn as well as it can, which is nice. It gives you both better performance and also quicker training, which are all nice things that we like. But that was then dealing with, for instance, these two columns. They are numbers, but they are different scales. Let's do scaling. And then we have the rest. Now let's continue then to look a bit on how to deal with these last columns that we have in our medical data case. One here is called blood type, and here we can come in with some domain expertise and say that I know that there are just four different blood types if we exclude pluses and minuses. Those are A, B, AB, and zero. So these are then not text as such, but they are in fact categories, categorical data. There are four different options. And this we need to make into numbers. Somehow all the stuff that goes into my network has to be in numbers, but then we can encode it, as we say. So for each of the class, make just a number that matches to it, and that will be our encoding.

## Dealing with text and categorical data (30:15)

So encoding, we will get to talk a lot about in the end. But this is one example of encoding. So just taking something and making a code for it, making a number for it. And one thing you can do, which is maybe the most simple, let's just say the first one is number zero. The second one is number one, and then number two, and number three, and so on. And we call it ordinal encoding often. And that is simple, right? So we have one column, and we just replace each of them. And I still have only one column, so I didn't expand my data unnecessarily. But then now we said that this is an ordering. So we're basically saying that a, b is the highest value, and zero is the lowest value. And that's not really how it works, at least as far as my medical expertise goes. So we basically ordered it now, and that can work in some cases, but we're sort of taking an assumption and squeezing in. It's not necessarily meaningful to do so. So we're adding some assumptions to things which may not be valid. So it was nice and simple, but probably we should do something else, which is called one-hot encoding, typically. And then you make instead new columns, new features, essentially. And then saying yes or no to whether the patient had this blood type. So for this patient, 3, 2, 1 had blood type A. So then making new columns and just saying yes to this one and no to the rest. And the naming is a bit random, maybe, but that's how it ended up. So one-hot just basically means that you can only have one of these classes. So you cannot be, if you're doing one-hot, you can't really be both blood type A and B at the same time. You can be AB, but that's a different column again. And doing it this way, now we have no ordering imposed to these ones. So just make each different column and then we don't assume stuff about how these blood types are related. So negative thing about this is that I add columns to my data set. And if I have very few patients in data and I keep adding a lot of columns, then that's not really a great asset to have more or less redundant columns. So I keep expanding my data, but I don't add information. So I get into the case of overfitting potentially more easily. So if I keep doing this, if I keep expanding everything here into new columns, I should also be aware of the possibility of now overfitting my model to the data. But in general, it's better because I don't assume stuff about how blood types work. So that was this one. So we solved this thing. Let's move on to the next, this diagnosis code, which is different, right? Because you can have many illnesses at once, but you can only have one blood type. So you can't have multiple blood types at once, but you can have, I don't know, heartbreak and fever and coughing and all these different things that you can have at the same time. So maybe we do something different for this. And we can then decide, OK, should we then do this ordinal encoding business and add new numbers for each or should we do something else? So this then is a bit more of a question for us to solve, depending on what data looks like. So option one is to do this. So this will be this will then be a number zero. And this combination of diagnosis will be number one and then two and then so on. We can kind of encode this, but don't adhere to the thing that all the entries should sum up to one. So I can say that, OK, patients three to one didn't have any diseases. So zero for all of these. Well, this patient six or two had actually these different diseases present or diagnosis codes. So let's just stick one to each of them. So this you can do. Then you will leave it to the model to learn if there's any correlation between these two columns. Though typically this would be better, I suppose, but you can say that, OK, maybe this particular particular combination of diseases at once should be treated separately. I don't know. But if you have some domain expertise on this that hints towards this deserving some special treatments, then that should be applied, of course, when you do the processing. But generally, if you add these columns, it kind of solves itself in a sense. And you leave it to the model to learn any correlations that might be might be between the different ones. So the more the model has to learn, the kind of better because less work for us unless we know something that the model doesn't immediately know that we can basically plug in when we get before we actually get started with the with the training. So if we know something clever that the model should also know, we can to some extent make good assumptions and data preprocessing to to facilitate learning of these things. But then we get to the to the interesting bits.

## Embeddings (36:54)

So now we're sort of hinting ahead a little bit to how we will do text processing in a couple of weeks after we get started with the project. We go into the domain of natural language processing where these things called embedding are super important. And that takes us back to basically this thing. So we sort of agreed that, OK, we can add columns for each of the category that we have in data. But the minus was, OK, maybe we have a lot of categories and then we add keep piling up columns. We had this risk of overfitting because I will now have what we call sparse columns, especially in the previous case. This one, let me assume a little bit better where we see that they're mostly zeros. Most of these entries are just zero and I have them one couple of places. And if I had some examples where I didn't have didn't have blood types, but I have something with more combinations than this could be could be a very long list. Let me see if OK, let's say if we take symptoms and add to these columns. So this first one would be headache and this one would be fatigue and then so on. Then I'm guessing there are like hundreds or probably thousands of different symptoms that you can have if you go to the doctor and describe pain somewhere. So I could have this being expanded into the hundreds of thousands or I mean hundreds or thousands or even more, which will typically be columns that are so. So the average patient probably doesn't have all symptoms, right? Probably go to the doctor with only one symptom, which means all of the remaining numbers here will just be zero for you as a patient. That's a bit annoying, so we have done this huge data set more or less or huge data in the horizontal way. At least I have a lot of columns, but there's not really any not really much information in them. There's just zeros, most of them, and that is inefficient and it's also a bit tedious to work with, especially when I start overfitting to different to these few different ones and not all these zeros. So then the question is, could we do this in a better way? Could we make columns that are fewer in numbers but then still contain the information that we are after? And well, surprise question is yes, we can do what we call embeddings and businesses basically making a new technically a new abstract vector space, which contains information that we need, but also is actually learned through training. So if I had this, I don't learn these columns by training, right? I do this by hands as a pre-processing step to make these columns and then I feed it to the model. But maybe the model itself could figure out what would be good columns. That would be something. So let's try and try and do this effectively then creating some kind of lookup table that matches some category to a not the class this time, but rather a vector. So some arrow pointing to someplace in space and this funky abstract space. This I generate myself during training of the model. And it's going to look something like this. So instead of saying blood type zero is number zero and blood type A is class number one and B is class number two and so on. I don't actually need integers at all. I can make floating points values. But I want them to be vectors. So blood type zero will actually be this vector, which is a bit funky, but it totally works. So this vector is now is now pointing somewhere this direction. I want to learn in my model instead of them manually saying it should be class zero or one or so on. And then I have one column, two columns, and these two columns I have for all of the different classes. And this will make a little more sense when we get to the word processing bits. But now we can already now try to reflect a little bit on embeddings and these abstract vector spaces and then get back to it when we have the use case, which is learning language. But then the big thing was so OK, I don't want to manually set encode these things. I want my model to make an encoding for me. This can be can be done by this embeddings. So in fact, I learn these numbers from the data. So if it turns out that people with blood type A and people with blood type B, they actually have the same medical issues or the same diseases. Often it could be that I'm studying some disease and then I see that usually people with blood type A and blood type B, they have similar diseases potentially. Then these should points, in fact, to similar places in this space that I construct. So in my embedded space, if these two are related, they should points more or less in the same direction, indicating relatedness. But if they're completely unrelated, then they just points in orthogonal directions. Or they could, of course, have a negative correlation in which they would points directly opposite directions. So we'll get back to this later and also try to plot this on a kind of a projection, basically plot it in space, because once we have vectors, we can plot them and then have a look at what they do. And we'll look at some magic in these embedded spaces. But the concept is then so I don't want to make encodings. I want to learn encodings automatically. I just have to now in this case, select how many new columns do I want? So in this case, I wanted to so it gets two numbers, but I could say three or I can say four. So the more data I have, the higher I can go without overfitting as as goes with all model parameters or hyper parameters or other mean. So there's a layer for this, which is quite popular. We call it technically entity embeddings in this case, because we'll work with words embeddings once we start looking at text. But it looks more like this. So you can use the same thing either if you look on categories like now or if you look at words as we will be doing and just have to select how many different categories do I have? In this case, I had four different blood types. So it's at this equal to four and output dimensionality is how many possible degrees of freedom would I like? So if I have a lot of data, I can choose a big number. If I have less data, I should probably choose a small number. Then, well, unfortunately, this is something I would have to test. So now I said dimensionality of output would be equal to two. So I have a vector into the space. But this once we get going with with text, then can probably set this to to a higher number. So this is hyper parameter. Then I have to choose it. There is no obvious way to choose it really. So this is a matter of trial and error, really, unless we know already from experience what could be could be a good value. So appendings, we don't really talk about it much now, but I'm just telling you this is awesome stuff. Just like convolutions just apply to different things. So then we'll get back to this. But then final two minutes, let's just look at what you can do.

## Network architectures for tabular data (46:27)

If you're in the case, you have tabular data, you want to make your best possible model CSV values or Excel sheets goes in and predictions should come out. And I just said convolutions are kind of useless because there's no relation between neighboring points. So what can we do? I can just take the typical vanilla dense network and apply this a bit of a downside with this as you have a lot of parameters really quickly. You don't really reuse the parameters like you do for convolutions. So it's going to help if you can do some feature engineering and just say how information should be should be processed. So then if I can engineer good features, then I can get away with fewer parameters, hopefully, and then do a nice network, hopefully. But that was it was kind of boring to just do this. So what can you do? Just to two examples I'm going to show real quick. So you can combine, for instance, a lot of nodes. So going wide or a lot of layers going deep. I can combine this and that's something that has been tested and works. So documentation there. Or you can also use what we don't know yet, but we will know in a couple of weeks, which is the transformer architecture, which is the stuff that powers Chachipity and the like. So there's a lot of different tests and different networks for this. But there's one thing we can say here is one, for instance, looks pretty cool. Tabular transformer uses this transformer thing, which we know is popular and very effective on texts. But we should just know this one thing from from the article they wrote about this. OK, it works better than the typical straight up neural network, the MLP multilayer perceptron, as it's called. But it only matches the performance of tree based ensemble models like random forests and the likes, which is a bit unsatisfactory. So we had this awesome thing, it's super complicated and it only matches the performance of boosted decision trees and so on.

## The best model for tabular data (49:00)

So that's why we should say that for tabular data, in fact, often it's better to just do something which is not deep learning and rather do something along the lines of random forest or gradient boosting and these things. Where you can see in green is the performance is typically best for some cases of some test cases investigated in this paper, while neural networks are kind of goofing around down here. It's getting both better and quicker using the non deep learning models. So we can end it there and say, OK, deep learning is great for its for some use cases where it works. But for any type of data, you're not guaranteed to succeed with deep learning. So it's not like it's always best. Sometimes it is, in fact, better to do more traditional methods and tabular data would be one of those cases. So I think we two minutes over time, so let's end it there and then we meet tomorrow at 10 15 and look at the details for our projects.
