# Lecture Notes

##  (0:39)

Okay, I think we can start. Yes, so we're still on time series, which I actually want to start with something else, which is to look at the plan. So as announced, I've sat down and tried to sort out the next couple of weeks. So updated quite recently then today, then we can have a look altogether. So this is week seven, right? So we're doing time series and we'll finish this today. And it's not the longest chapter. So maybe we finish a bit early even, which would be nice. But then comes the interesting bits. So I think now we take a quick break from the book and then I come back to it in March. So what I want to do now for the next two weeks was that in week nine, so two weeks from now, we do this project week thing. So then let's just spend the time on doing real stuff. So we cancel the lectures for this week. So I'm available in this typical lecture time if you have questions and stuff. Otherwise, you get all week free to work on your project. That ends with the one mandatory assignment, which is to… I can show it like you see it… which is to submit your project topic. So that's the only mandatory thing we have. And it's quite easy. So you just have to write in a few sentences

## Project pre-approval (7:51)

what you want to do for the project. And the point is, so we want to do a little bit of approval so you don't do something which is way too or way too little ambitious. So it's just going to be… Well, one thing is for you to list the group names. So as we know, two to three students would be would be good. Any other sizes, you would also have to get approval through this process. Then quick little title for you that you can change later. And then main thing is this

## Requirements (8:39)

short description. So a couple of sentences, two to three, just saying what you plan to do. That is the second most important thing. I guess the most important thing, in fact, is to just list your data source. So we don't really have the time to go and look for or collect data ourselves. So for the project to be realistic, you also have to say, I want to use this exact data and then give either a link to a data set or describe where you will get it. So that set can be anything. So if you just… Well, if you have a specific idea, then maybe you know where to Google to find the data sets. Or if you want to get inspired by this project catalog, there are lists of data sets that you can use just to show that you have this at hand and can start training. And then final one sentence is just saying, okay, I want to use… I want to use CNNs with… Could be anything. Anything from the course or things outside of the course as well, but you should… You will be graded on to what extent you were able to tie this to the course. So that's important to have at least something that is from the book like CNNs, RNNs, Transformers that we'll get into or something like this. And this you just submit and I set them the deadline. Yeah, two weeks and a bit from now. Where is it? Yeah, two weeks and a bit. So I should be short, even put an example for you. So just write something that looks like this, your names, title, doesn't matter, you can change it. And then some description on what you want to do and how you… What data you have to support your experiments. That's it. And that's the only mandatory thing we have to do in order to get to the point where we can submit the final project and go to the exam. And yeah, while we're at it, project catalog is still there. I can suggest things to be added if you like. Otherwise, of course, just be inspired to any of these things. So you absolutely do not have to choose among

## Music genre detector (11:21)

these. This is just for inspiration. So if you need some points to start, then you can read through this and see if it looks interesting. But there's more fun to be had, of course, if you come up with your own projects. But then at least some kind of useful, less useful things

## Medical and health (11:39)

are available for you to try out. So that was this on the project. And the other important thing that we'll get to, maybe go to the slides again.

## Project (11:57)

So for the project, we want the following to happen on Canvas, which is look at the project catalog if you feel like. Otherwise, select yourself. And then add group, submit this proposal thing. And it will most likely be approved immediately. Or I will suggest some changes for you to probably or hopefully help you get it done in reasonable time and receive a good grade. But then the big plan. So next week, or well, we can go to the week after. So project work, then this week of project work ends with you having to send in this project proposal. But you can also do it before. If you already know, then just send it now and you're good. But then we have this entire week of time to decide on all the things you want to do and get some hints if you like, and then just get started. Usually we say that the sooner you start, the better it goes. But then given that we'll have all this week of work time, then it would be nice to take the next week to prepare a little bit. So next week then we'll go through this. There's a long piece of text that is used by the sensor to grade your exam. So we can go through this and just see what is required from you and what is not required but expected and these things. And then start a bit of planning. But then for you to get the most out of your project work.

## Personer (13:48)

So one thing we'll do is to read chapter 18 in the book, which is towards the end, which is called best practices for deep learning. This is partly useful because we want to kind of know the best practices before we start doing the practice. But I can mention it also has a bit of

## Contents (14:12)

extra stuff that is maybe not so relevant to us. So it's a chapter with a very nice title. We want to know the best practices before we start so we don't do stupid stuff. Hyperparameter optimization is one important thing. But then you'll see like towards the end, it gets a bit technical on stuff that might not be relevant for us. So let's say that this chapter 18, we use it as a basis for project work, but then we don't include it for the exam. I think that would be okay. But there's a lot of technical stuff and some of this might be of great use for the project. So that's this. Then even more. So I also wanted to take these lectures of next week to not only discuss project requirements but also some tools that can come in handy. So there's a lot of different tools that you can use to structure all your experiments, squeeze the most out of your models, visualize how they perform, do some different tests to see where they can be improved and all these things. That would be then very cool to have next week before we get started. So then you're set with a full toolbox full of tips and tricks for how to make the best possible projects. So then next week is a bit okay, still read chapter 18, but the rest is a bit outside of the book. And it's not something that we'll ask too much about on the exam, but it's something that will be important for the project work, which is as we know, half of your grades. And then week nine, we just get to work, get stuff done and learn by doing so to say. So then project nine, we aim at no lectures, but next week we do lectures on tools and things that are kind of supporting the theory bits for our project work. But then also, we discussed it a long time ago, we have to decide on when we will submit the project

## Project submission date (16:39)

because you take all different courses and you're on different programs and whatnot. Set up this vote, which you don't have to do now, but you have to do it by next week, because then I have to send the dates that you vote to the exam office and then they make this wise flow business and so on and so on. Which also means that once the exam office has said this will be the dates, then there's absolutely no discussing. Even I cannot change it after them. So try and think a bit which date will be most suitable for you and then do the votes. There's also the link on Canvas, you don't have to do it now, but by next week. So then we have this set up and then again, there is no way to hand in later than the date that we say, because this is all in the hands of the exam office once we send the dates. So absolutely non-negotiable once we have set the dates, but until then you can choose which is most conveniently or most convenient for you. So at least if you're on data engineer, IT bachelor, then there are some dates for the obliques that you might want to keep in consideration. These are not among those, but for those on other programs and taking other courses you might have some things you want to take into consideration. So it's going to be difficult for us to accommodate everyone, but we'll try as well as we as well as we can. Yes, you can change the vote until end of next week. Yes, so if you realize that you get a different date for something else and you need to change, you can change it up until next I think Friday or something. And you can also only vote once. So that's why it's probably a login to this thing with the student accounts. Right, so I've said many things like I usually do, but let's say even more things. So I've now added the date for the exam. It should be visible in student web for all of you. And if you want to do some practice on all the exams, I'll also put them here. Some info about the exam. And here are the different ones that we have. So we can say that, okay, this course used to be a couple of years back an oral exam, which means that we're limited on the number of different exams that we have. And since this is a course that is quite up to date, we also change a couple of things every year. So not everything from the first exams will be all that relevant. So you'll probably see if you go to the first ones, there is some talk about a fast AI library at some point. This has now been replaced by Keras. So if you see something that is absolutely not something you have heard about before, it's probably not relevant. Maybe there's one. Yeah, like this one, fast AI library. We don't use it anymore. Then just be aware that there's some things that have changed. And also some extra

## Exams to use for preparation (20:24)

questions if you have this. So that was one extra thing I wanted to say. Yeah, and then finally also

## Konto (20:33)

once we get started with the project, and I'll put out the templates for the reports, which has

## mal-prosjektrapport.docx (20:45)

some things that might be relevant to think about before you start working. So it says, okay, this was the Norwegian one, but it's like a couple of things, a couple of points that you probably want to answer. But then, of course, all this stuff, you just delete when you write the actual report. But if you want to have already now some overview of what we hope that you will do, you can have a look at the template for the reports. So I can say two things right now. So the template is not, or the report is not supposed to be very long. The more concise you can be,

## Emner (21:24)

the better. And secondly, you're not graded by how well your model performs. You're graded by how much you show that you understand about deep learning. So if you have a somewhat ambitious project and it fails, then that's perfectly fine, as long as you can argue why and how and these things. So then I think I'm done talking about this, but I will keep talking about it next week as well. But then we can get to the actual content for today, which is to continue on these

## Sequences (21:57)

sequences. They were serious and they had some ordering and turns out the ordering was quite important. So we want to have some method that is able to take into account ordering of things. And we already know how to do this. If we want to recognize certain patterns, then we had convolutions. And then we looked at yesterday how great these convolutions are and how you can use it for a lot of different stuff. But then we also found out that there are some new assumptions now that we start looking at stuff over as a function of time. Then if we're going to predict, then this is a different task that we did before. And then for prediction, usually recent data might be more important than old. But it would be very nice if our model is able to somehow remember what it saw in the past on this new data that comes in. So remember something that is not in training data, so to say, but comes in on the new test data. And then we looked at this

## Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (23:06)

cool method for doing so, which we called recurrent neural networks, which are now kind of special because they have loops. So they don't have a straight line of computation anymore. But actually we take the output from one time step and then shove it in as an input to the next time step. So these things have two inputs in fact, which is the data itself and our previous prediction. But now we introduced a memory more or less from time to time. So each time I go to the next time step, then I remember what I did at the previous time step. Then I can also remember the time step before and so and so. And then one thing with this, so these are the figures from the book, is to try and write this for multiple time steps in this figure. And then we have to do what is called unrolling in time. And then we see, okay, so here's input at t minus one. Then we make an output like we always do. But we also take this output, call it now a state and put it into this box at time step number t. And then this keeps going, right? So each time step, we take input, the actual data and also the state from before. And if we start at the first possible point in data, then we just take zero as the input state. And then this serves as the memory. So each time I can make a prediction of this at this time, knowing the data and also knowing what I said at the previous time step would be my output. Then also a different figure to show this, just how you can have several nodes in with one such block. So in fact, what we have for this simple RNN, as we call it, is really just the good old dense layer, but with a loop going around. And implementing this, I'll just show it very quickly, that we need, I misspelled, sorry. We're supposed to say w and u. So we need an extra set of weights. And then we take these weights and multiply with our states. And then we take the original weights and multiply by the inputs and then just sum it all up. So it's very much like the stuff we saw before in dense layers. We just add an extra set of weights, an extra set of basically multiplying weights and states. This we can use and we have used it in the notebooks and it's called simple RNN in Keras. But then you can think as well, we also hinted to yesterday that if you have something that is called simple RNN, maybe we also have something that is called complicated RNN or something like this. And that is absolutely the case. So let's look at maybe one of the most complicated things that we have in a bit. But before this, I just want to make one little digression on time series before

## Intermezzo: Autoregressive models (26:33)

we go to the most complicated type of layer that we will use, which is to look at old school statistics. So before we had deep learning, we still had time series. But what did people do then when they wanted to make predictions? Then we had what's called autoregressive models. And we'll say this in plain language in two seconds. Let's just first say, if I have some time series, what is the simplest kind of prediction I can say? So if I want to predict the weather tomorrow, what is the simplest thing I can do? I can just say, okay, I'm guessing it's going to be exactly the same as yesterday. And if I'm predicting weather, then I'm going to be correct like 60 to 70% of the time by just guessing it's the same as it was yesterday. So just doing this dead simple thing of guessing that stuff doesn't change usually gets us quite far. So my prediction would be just, okay, prediction at time step y is, oh sorry, it should say t. But in any case, prediction at time step t would be just same as I measured at t minus one. And for one of the notebooks for this week, we want to predict on the number of passengers taking public transports in Chicago, just because we have the data for Chicago. And it looks a bit like so, and seems like there's kind of a pattern going, right? If we want to be pattern recognizers of ourselves, we can see that, okay, that's like five days a week where people take a lot of bus and train. And then there's two days a week where people take a little less bus and train, and these happen to be week ends. And that kind of makes sense to us, right? And then we can use this term that we defined yesterday, which is seasonality, like it changes with the regular pattern as a function of time. I can just say, okay, I know that the pattern is week ends. But this, yeah, for our machine learning case, we want to learn it automatically. But let's also see how far we get without really involving too many or involving any neural network at all. Then you can also do something which, if you're into statistics, you really probably love to plot, which is the so-called autocorrelation function. And then let's now define all this cool language that we like in statistics. So first, auto, it just means self and regression is predicting a value, right? Autoregressive is then just predicting based on yourself. So this would be an autoregressive model because I'm predicting just based on the value I had from the same data at the time step before. And then you can expand this a little, and you can see how much each of these measurements per day correlated to the previous day, and so on. And that, if we look at this, it says, first of all, one data point for, let's say, if we're now on Tuesday, then I will be 100% correlated with the number of this Tuesday, obviously. So if I'm comparing two numbers and the numbers are exactly the same because I'm on the same exact day, then this will be the same. That's a bit silly, but okay. Let's then move on to, if this is Tuesday, how does it correlate to the value on Monday? Van correlates quite well. And then on Sunday, for instance, it's not really correlated at all. Saturday, no, sorry, it was negatively correlated, so we're actually quite a bit down. Saturday was so-and-so, and then going about through these days. But what we can say, so each time this point is high up, it means that the value on this day was correlated to a value on a previous day, and it happens to be that there's always seven points in between. So if I'm on a Tuesday and I want to know if I'm correlated to any day last week, it will be seven days ago, the previous Tuesday. And then this again is the previous Tuesday, and this is the previous Tuesday, and so on. So this weekly pattern, seasonality, it comes up, and we can plot it, and it looks cool. But it's in a sense what we already knew if we sit down and reflect a little bit on weekdays, and people going to work, and so on. But we can do this a little more advanced. So saying that, okay, value today is the same as yesterday. That's a bit silly in a sense, but we can say it in a less silly way by adding how does it depend on yesterday, the day before, the day before that, and so on. So we can keep adding all these terms, and then we have a statistical model that has parameters, and we need to fit them as we know, which is just looking behind and then trying to make then this functional prediction of what is going on depending on what's happened in the past. So looking at this thing, again, being on a Tuesday, then the parameter for Tuesday last week should be high because that was very correlated. But then the parameter for Sunday last week should be low because that was less correlated, and so on. So you can do pretty well-performing stuff just by looking at what happened in the past. And this is in a way doing what we want to do which is to remember somehow what we saw in the past to add some kind of states, which is encoded in these parameters to make a prediction about the future given the past. And then statisticians, they like to give different names to things. So if you're adding a kind of average overall of this, you get the so-called ARMA model, and then if you look at this plot and take into account, you get ARMA models and then seasonality and SAREMA, and you can keep adletters and stuff. And the two points are that first of all, in time series, looking back in time is super useful because that tells you often everything you need to know. And second thing is if you now tried the notebooks, you probably saw that it was actually quite hard to get any deep learning stuff really performing well. Usually it was just useless results, and then we kept changing things, and it was still kind of useless results. So time series, they are often very difficult. So if you happen to be in the case where you need to make some predictions based on time series, then very often it's going to be useful to pick one of these traditional, let's call it, statistical tools and start there and make this your baseline. Even something as simple as just predicting the value today, same as yesterday, it's going to be often a baseline that can be difficult to beat, even silly as it is. So okay, that was a bit of a digression then. If we are into time series, then deep learning is unfortunately a bit difficult, and it's nice to compare it to the existing things which are usually quite good and have been refined over decades, hundreds of years probably.

## Improved memory cells (35:09)

Now, okay, this traditional statistics, it works well, but it's not really the topic of the course is it. So let's now try to take our recurrent models and see if we can make them work as well as a traditional statistical model can. And one thing we can say directly is that this simple RNN, which remembers its previous output, really quickly gets into this well-known problem of ours, which is vanishing gradients. So we knew that if we had convolutional networks, then we also had this problem and we were able to, without any tricks, we were able to get into the range of like 15, 16, maybe 20 layers. And we see sort of the same thing for RNN, that if I'm training on time series that are longer than like 20-ish time steps, then usually I forget all the stuff I saw in the past, and I can with this simple RNN usually just remember like a couple of tenths of time steps back. And the rest tends to zero out, and I have this thing that I have vanishing gradients, and I'm not really able to learn too much of long-term dependencies. So a very short time series, okay, but longer ones, there it gets tricky. So again, we have this annoying problem of vanishing gradients, and we have to introduce some trick to solve it. So one trick, which is the basis for these two more complicated models we'll see today, is to say that, okay, maybe my prediction from last time around is not necessarily all that useful to make the next predictions. Maybe I can do something else, I can add some hidden states, which is more useful than just taking my previous outputs. So the simple thing, it would just, you know, do in the loop the outputs as an input, but maybe we can do something else which enables us to remember further back in time. So this one only remembers one step back in time, right, and once I have many of these, I kind of tend to forget once I do this for too many time steps. So we'll get into two things, which this one maybe you have heard of before, long short-term memory it's called, which sounds a bit funny, but we'll get into why. And also a bit of a more modern approach, which is gated recurrent units, which is maybe less known, but it works a little bit better usually. Right, so one complicated diagram for you. Let's explain it, and then take a little break,

## The long short-term memory (LSTM) cell (38:12)

and then get back and see if we still remember what it did. So the LSTM, long short-term memory, seems a bit funny, right, but the thing is we want both short-term memory and we want long-term memory, because long-term memory was the difficult thing. Once we had many time steps, it kept breaking down. But then at some point, a very clever German researcher called Jürgen Schmidt-Huber and colleagues, they kind of went to work with one thing in mind, which was to solve the Spanish ingredients problem once and for all. To do so, they came up with this kind of complicated beast. But it seems cool. So this guy, Mr. Schmidt-Huber, he could be kind of the perfect bond villain in a sense. He has a tendency of wearing just plain white suits, and then he had a research lab on top of a mountain in Switzerland at some point. He kept sitting there at the top of the mountain and cooking up this super complicated stuff. Luckily, not with the intention of destroying the world, but rather solving this nasty problem of the Spanish ingredients. So they came up with the following. So instead of having one state which is propagated, let's have two states and say that one is going to be a short-term memory and one is going to be a long-term memory. So age for this short-term and C for this long-term thing. This diagram itself, it's not shown in our book. So I took it from the book that we had last year. So you can look it up there if you like, or get it elsewhere. But you see it has a lot of different stuff going on. And even this kind of network inside of a network type of thing, which contains no less than four different fully connected layers built into this box. So this box is one layer by itself,

## Forget gate (40:33)

but it's made out of smaller layers itself. And kind of the point is, so we take data in, and then we also have these states trying to remember what we had in the past.

## LSTM cell (40:48)

And then we're going to be quite clever about this and say, based on this first little neural network, should I keep the long-term state or should I forget this one? Basically asking, is this input relevant to me or should I forget this input and focus on something else? I can focus, for instance, on the input data, or I can focus on the short-term states. So then again, but if I learn something from the short-term, I need to put this in the long-term state. All of these, well, actually these two networks will do this and say, if you follow the arrow, okay, so short-term, it was important. So we put it to this gate and this network says, ah, yeah, keep it. Then we shove it into the long-term state and then propagates. And then kind of similar-ish thing for the short-term outputs then. So then it will go in and this one will decide, is it important? If yes, store it as the short-term state and then proceed. So you can see how this is a little bit complicated, right? So we have three different inputs. We have four different mini networks. We have different gates that can either choose to keep information or reject information. And then this, as you probably can imagine, is a bit tedious to train. But because of all these things, we do have a flow of information through the entire thing. And we are able to focus on either longer or shorter-term states, which then are not the predictions themselves, right? So these states, they just try to help us making future predictions. They are not the predictions themselves. But yeah, it's kind of cool. So we have to make choices. So first of all, what to use the input state for, what to use the different states for, choose to add the information to the states or not, and then propagate this stuff. So this is what people came up with after sitting in their lab on this mountaintop for years. And it does absolutely work. But then time series are again difficult. So it takes a while to really still make a network that works optimally with this thing. But then before we had transformers, which we still haven't learned about, then this was the state of the art. And if you used, for instance, Google Translate in up until 2023, I guess, then this was what powered the translation. So it had a stack of seven different LSTM layers that would do the translation for you in Google Translate. And this, as we know, it works really well. So you can absolutely, if you put your effort and computing into it, make this work really quite well. But it is, I mean, it is super complicated, right? So trying to unroll this in time, then you have a lot of arrows going about, but the concept is still the same. So it's just that you need to propagate the long term and the short term states, take them as inputs, and then keep going. But luckily for us, we don't have to do this ourselves, even though we could. It's still a business of multiplying weights and computing these states, but it's then called Keras dot layers LSTM. And it works the same way as the simple RNN layer that we already tried. But then I think let's, in the last couple of minutes

## The gated recurrent unit (GRU) (45:00)

before the break, do this updated version, which is slightly less complicated. And then after the break, we can do maybe 20 minutes of stuff and then take hopefully an early lunch for once. But there's some things we can do. So this one had a lot of stuff going on. So many things to train, different states, different outputs, all this. Turns out you can simplify it a bit and still get comparable or sometimes even better results for what is called the gated recurrent unit. So recurrent because we are working on recurrence, right? So we have this memory component that we want to keep. And we learned from LSTM that these gates that select if you want to keep or reject information, these are kind of nice. But we can reduce the complexity a little bit while still having these mini networks that either compute new states or control this gate that selects if you want to keep information or reject information, more or less. At least you have fewer elements, although the basis is the same, but we now have one hidden state only. And this state, again, it doesn't, it's not a prediction of sorts, it's just keeping track over time what we saw in the past. So we just call it a hidden state because it's not really useful for anything related to this prediction at this time step. We want to keep it for next and then either add stuff to it with this plus sign or remove stuff from it with this cross depending on what we see in data. So at least we're getting by with one fewer states. Output that goes here as usual, states moves on and we call it then or use it as layers.gru for the gated recurrent unit. So before we take a break, so we can say this particular thing is not in the book, I think. So let's say we also don't take it on the exam, but the LSTM still we could, we should include for the exam, I think. Let's say simple RNN, LSTM, yes. So this one, you don't have to explain this thing on the exam, but when you do your project, if you need to work in time series, then this is a very good contender to this thing. So we'll make sure to make really nasty questions about this thing on the exam. But then we can take the break, I think, and then do 15 minutes as usual, meet at 15 pasts, and then we try to sum up everything we learned about time series before we then next week do all sorts of different tools. Okay, it's time for the pasts. Let's do the final bit and then we can hopefully take lunch a little bit early. Then to sum up, we saw these complicated things which, well, do operate as a layer because of inputs and outputs. It's just that they all so propagate this memory state, which we didn't have for convolutions, for instance. So the point of this memory was not to recognize new patterns. We can do other things for that. So the point is to just knowing that, for instance, temperature tends to go up after it has gone down. Then we can encode this in the state so that when I make my new prediction and I see that temperature is starting to rise, then I know that this, I remember, so now it's going to go up again and I can use this to make predictions. So a new thing here is really just this memory or state, as we call it, that gets updated while it gets updated during training, right, but it also gets updated during testing, which is absolutely not the case for convolutions, for instance.

## Stacking recurrent layers (51:54)

But then let's do deep learning as we're supposed to. Then we can, as we know, make all these intermediate abstract representations that somehow encode information in a better way. That makes us do better predictions and it gets a little bit different when we have recurrence, because then we said that for each time step that would be this step, no, sorry, state output, right? But now we can use this as output to the next layer in some sort of fashion that looks like this. So these are time steps like we had on this axis and then we also have layers in this direction and then layer number one gives its state to layer number one at the next time. Layer number two gives its state to layer number two at next time and so on. So it gets a little bit different and there is a way in Keras to say that this is what you want, which is this return sequences equal true thing. So if we are stacking layers then we should return all the sequences so that we get this behavior that we want right here. While then at the end I probably just want my one output so the final layer doesn't have this, doesn't need this return sequence thing. So then I just want my prediction out and then I can do, I can do something something dense layer with this if I like and then take my output into this complete model instance, which once we define it allows us to construct the computational graph that we need going from inputs to outputs in the fashion that we designed. So there's one thing to remember that once we keep stacking layers for improved performance then this is probably something we want. So if I forget this then I'm just passing one value to the next layer and it doesn't really give this nice structure that we want. Stacking layers, sorry, then I want this and if I have seven of these stacks then I could construct Google Translate of early 2020s or less.

## Training RNNs (54:33)

But then so we tried this in notebooks and it was a bit tricky so let's introduce some yeah tricks and heuristics to improve the the workflow for us and to make training a bit more efficient. So often we see that when trying to train these recurrent models that they start out somewhere but then they don't really learn, they don't really learn, they just keep overfitting pretty quickly. So yeah, this you probably saw from notebooks that's training, loss goes down and that's nice but validation loss just covers around some baseline value which is not too good. So let's see how we can improve this a little bit. So one thing we can do is something we in other cases do not want to do but for all LSTMs it can make sense to have these so we call what we call saturating activation functions which go from minus one to one or zero to one that don't have this non-saturating, what should we call it, graph just keep coming up. It's stuck in between some some values and that helps us stabilize things a bit often but this is a this is a matter of yeah testing really but it can help a bit and you can select different activation functions so activation it's is what you apply after you did the computation for the for the given layer while you also do some stuff inside of the LSTM as we saw and you can also specify which activation function to use for this if you like. So big search space of different things to to test but that is half the fun of deep learning right that we get these hundreds or thousands of hyperparameters to optimize. Next layer normalization we didn't really discuss it that much but you have been exposed to it and the book also talks a bit about this and the deal here was again just to make the numbers a little bit nicer. So if in between the layers we have numbers that are like zero to one in that range usually that helps the the gradients when we want to update the parameters and then often we're using what we called batch normalization we can also use something which is called layer normalization which looks a little bit different but it's still doing more or less the same thing but ensuring values in between the layers are reasonable without us specifying too much what reasonable really means but it means some number which is not exactly zero and some number which is not infinite. So that is the thing we can we can do and this is yeah say always recommended really to do this and then one thing so regular dropout you can use but we also have the option of adding so-called recurrent dropouts this you can read in the in the documentation of course but it's basically adding dropouts inside of all these other mechanisms that we had going for the LSTM. So we had these dense networks these mini networks we can have dropouts there and also we can tune this activation function this colored thing that goes on the top. So with complex layers comes many things to adjust and Keras will allow it to adjust in arguments to the layer as so and this is also something to try. So often if you have this typical old case that you get you go immediately into overfitting don't really learn anything but the training loss goes down then maybe this would be the first thing to to start doing to add this recurrent dropouts. So there are a bit of things specific to these RNNs so these are tips for RNNs and they don't generalize necessarily to all other types of models except maybe to use layer normalization which can be can be nice. But then we have this last little thing that we mentioned also yesterday so because of this working over time steps this unrolling in time that we discussed it can be that these networks train a bit slower than you would expect and it can also be the very funny case that you can train faster on a CPU just on the processor than on the graphics cards. So for other types of things we do convolutions especially we have a lot of matrix multiplication and then the GPU is the big winner immediately but in this case we have these pesky four loops so we did not really have this nice directed graph anymore we had loops and that makes it difficult to parallelize because I have to compute for this time step and take the state and then propagate the state and then compute next time step and all this stuff I can't just take my entire batch and then compute everything at once. So RNNs are a bit annoying in that sense that they break this parallel parallelizability for my computation in batches and also these time steps. So that's one thing you can do however if you have a lot of memory to spare which is to just do this entire unrolling thing and then you have something that looks like where do I have it that looks like this and then you notice that okay here I do in fact have a directed acyclic graph because I have my inputs going there and then I have all these arrows and then they point to some output there but then I have to stuff all my intermediate stuff into memory and then it can be faster but it takes quite some space and we've probably spent most of our memory already but that is one thing which is very peculiar to these RNNs but if you have the memory for it you can do the so-called unrolling and then it goes a little bit faster because then you can start to parallelize stuff. Right so something to take into account I don't have to remember all of this but if you have if you're working on time series and have some trouble with recurrence then maybe look into these tips but then let's do even

## Bonus trick #1: CNN processing (61:45)

let's do even better tips maybe let's try to merge all the stuff that we know which are now by now two things CNNs and RNNs well of course also the so-called dense layer so we have three different things that we know how about we merge all of them so we have convolutions right we know that they are very good pattern detectors we tested this some I talked

## Even with the previous tricks up our sleeve, g steps is… (62:12)

to lengths about this yesterday how how nice these are to recognize patterns but they don't remember anything about what it saw in the past so for the previous event we looked at convolutions don't really remember anything but it does recognize patterns but then once I do convolutions I get a new time series out right if I do this in one dimension where I detect stuff and this is still yeah still the time series that I could put into my recurrent layer so I can combine these layers so I can do first a step that recognizes that recognizes patterns and then I have this step which recognizes patterns over time let's call it and then I can have a dance at the end to make my prediction and then this works quite nice in unison so doing or making predictions directly on the data is not always the best but some kind of pre-processing can help us quite a bit so if we start out by just recognizing patterns I think this as the inputs to our recurrent recurrent layer and this can help us a little bit because then well convolutions pick out the smaller scale so if I do like I don't know a kernel size of four then I'm looking at four time steps but then the recurrent bits can look at or remember time steps for the back right which the convolutional layer counts to so this is something and maybe I want to down sample as well so maybe like strides equal to something just down sample as well so I have fewer fewer number of of steps that goes into my recurrent bits because then we said that okay the more time steps I have in my recurrent thing the harder it gets to remember stuff that far is far in the back so often it makes sense to just down sample and aggregates my my recognized patterns and then take this as the input to the in this case gated recurrent unit if I want to use this so then it has fewer things to keep in mind at once and that might help us so that is one thing so we do pre-processing essentially of our inputs and then take this to the recurrent layer or maybe secondly maybe we can also just skip the entire recurrence thing completely if we like so there's something you can do to change the behavior of convolutions which is the basis for one thing which called wave net that is an audio or speech recognition type model to begin with I think which has to say okay convolutions are nice let's just do convolutions but let's make them in a way that they only look backwards in time and there is a way to do this in keras which is to say oops it's a bit better which is to say that padding is

## # Look only backul (65:30)

causal I misspelled this as casual it's supposed to say causal of course let's fix this so it's not a casual padding it is a causal padding meaning looking then backwards in time and you can see in this this animation how it's kind of kind of looks then the point is that if we do the correct amount of max pooling and strides and whatnot then my prediction for this one point is really looking quite far back so it's has a wide receptive field we call it so at this point I'm predicting based on this point and this point and this point and all the way to the back so I have a lot of information that goes into my cnn still so can absolutely also be something to to test so here purely using convolutions to predict the future and it looks relatively far backwards in time so it doesn't have any states it just looks backwards and then try to infer from from what it saw in in the past set in one go so to say so this you can do cnn's either one or a couple of cnn's first and then your recurrent layer or maybe also just try only cnn's to see if this this helps so that was one trick cnn's for convolutions are great as I keep saying and they can also be of great use for

## Bonus trick #2: bidirectional RNNs (67:09)

these time series even if doing prediction and not only classification but then there's one other thing as well which is implemented in keras that we that we can look at which sounds really cool but it's kind of simple which is bi-directional recurrent neural networks so we said okay so one of the assumptions for our time series stuff was to say that recent data points are probably most important because of this auto correlation business and then we also want to keep some some state of what happened in the past and then ordering by time is or by other order of sequence is is useful because that satisfies our assumption right but then it can be that in some sequences the ordering itself is is important but maybe not critical so if I do I keep with this google translates task so maybe I want to translate these different things so it's a sequence to sequence thing so it's a bit okay it's a bit beyond what we have done for notebooks but we can still imagine more or less how this would work but the point is the words in english do not come in the same order as in german for instance because the verb was put at the end and then it looks a bit looks a bit different so there are yeah there is one hack you can do which surprisingly enough works in many cases which is to actually just reverse the ordering of of the sequence and then take both of these as inputs to the rnn so then you're saying in this rnn number one we're doing it in the regular order so I'm

## d in reverse by (69:06)

saying that last time steps will be most important but then you have a copy which is has its own weights okay so it's not a copy but it looks the same that says ah actually maybe the first thing was most important to making my next prediction so then if I'm doing this sequence to sequence thing then I'm predicting a lot of stuff right so maybe even reversing the the ordering like so makes sense and then this rnn does its thing this one does its thing and then we add it all up and then predict on basis of this this thing is a separate layer and it can take any layers in so in in keras it looks like this bi-directional so this will do the reordering trick and then you say okay it should operate on an lstm for instance or any other recurrent

## rocess sequences both forwards and in reverse by a… (70:03)

or sequence processing layer that you that you would like to have so in my opinion seems completely wacky but it's in many cases it works so so this is also something to to try yes uh should say should say output data so stole this from the book let's say what does the book say I mean the processing goes that way so it has to be output data no I think even the book has it wrong I think it should definitely say outputs data this one so then sort of this part is the job of this bi-directional layer and then doing computation itself is the job of the input so bi-directional layer doesn't have any weights or anything it's just dusty reordering and yes this works and some sometimes at least so this is also something to to try in particular if you maybe want to challenge the assumption a little bit of of the recent data being the most important and this you maybe sometimes want to do in case of the sequence to sequence thing so the book and also us this week we are mainly looking at things like this like the the next point prediction right that was as we as we saw yesterday only one of different tasks you can do because since we get all these intermediate outputs we get a full sequence right so we have sequence in sequence out we are doing technically sequence to sequence which would be language translation is kind of the prime example it's just that usually when predicting the next point we keep only the last one just reject the rest but we still have the opportunity to to use it so if i'm not predicting only the next step if i'm predicting an entire sentence out then bi-directional processing can be something for for us to try and on that i think yeah i can mention also at this point so if you remember we have been talking about ensembling right taking different models and combining the the output and this is a kind of mini ensemble inside of your model in in a sense right so they operate on same but different data and then this makes one prediction this makes another prediction and then the hope is that the ensemble prediction the the added up prediction of these will be better than just one of them so it's a kind of a mini ensemble inside of a network so we can have loads of funny stuff going on with networks inside of networks as we see for this monstrosity called the lstm rights so if you want to have some fun tonight you can try and code this up yourself i've not tried but it should be not maybe not too hard or we just used lstm class directly and then be done with it okay i think that was most things i wanted to say for today so then yeah we spent these 20 okay it was actually 25 minutes but then we have some time left for lunch so i think we we can end it here for today and then we meet next week super ready to start project kickoff and learn about some tools that will be useful for us and then again week after a 100% work on the project
