# optimisers and loss curves
I think we are on time, more or less. Zoom, soundcheck, testing, testing. Yes, back. Okay, so we have sound and we have camera. So we are all set. It is Monday, week five then. Yeah, three weeks in and we already got quite far. So for today then we will continue with image recognition stuff, classifying images. I've got to go a bit beyond the sort of straightforward model that we tested in notebooks so far. And then quite quickly tomorrow actually gets to the state of the art in computer vision stuff. Well, at least for classification that is. And then for next week we can look into more different tasks besides classification, like actually finding the position of something in an image and making an outline of it and doing slightly more complicated stuff rather than just saying yes or no to the presence of something in the image. But still we have some stuff to cover before we get there. Okay, I can start reading already and doing the notebooks. But then for today I was thinking, let's do a bit of theory stuff before we start looking at images again tomorrow. So we are absolutely in the business of training models, right? And we have done it without much fuss so far, but let's make a little fuss about it. And then yeah, just look at some stuff that the book doesn't really cover that much, but still important for training models. So we'll look at optimization methods today and stare a bit at some loss curves as well, because we need loss curves for some of the things tomorrow. So okay, more like this would be the outline more or less. So we'll look at gradient descent today. Well, we already did, but let's get a little more technical with it. I have also posted a video for those who like videos that go a bit more into the visualization part on gradient descent, which is hard to do in a lecture. But you can look at this if you like, it's optional. But then also have a look at some of these faster optimization methods. Some of them that are a little more fancy than just a plain stochastic gradient descent. And then as announced, we will look a bit into how to diagnose and optimize the training process by looking at these loss curves. And then tomorrow, let's look at images all of tomorrow. So look at how to make synthetic images, how to make new connections that are not sequential in the network. And that allows us to do a lot of cool stuff, basically train very deep neural networks, at least convolutional networks at this point. And then once we know this, we can just boom, go directly for the most advanced architectures as we call it, the most advanced types of connecting outputs and inputs of different layers to make state of the art stuff. So still, well, state of the art stuff is kind of advanced, right? And that's a lot of considerations to make. But once we get into this bit, there's a new world opened to us that allows us to do basically all kinds of cool stuff. And difficult stuff, of course, also. So then we have to think a little about our optimization process. So the entire thing of deep learning, as we saw, is to try and maintain good numbers all around your inputs and outputs, different layers, so that they can learn a maximum amount of patterns that we can use for making a decision. And then, yeah, as we'll see, some problems arise in this numerical optimization, basically. So everything we do is numerical optimization. So let's try and optimize it as well as possible. So that's the plan for this week. So tomorrow will be exciting. And today, a bit of theory.

## Loss functions (10:00)

Just briefly look at some equations, and if it gets too much, you can lie down, apparently. But okay, so again, these equations are not something you need to remember, but let's look at some of them still. So what are we doing, really? Well, we had this measure that we called the loss or the error function that we need to minimize, because the smaller error we make in predictions, well, the better the predictions are. And then we said, okay, we can quantify this by a loss function. And since we're doing gradient descent, it has to be, we have to be able to make the, sorry, compute the gradient, as we call it. So we have to be able to differentiate this thing, which means it has to be kind of smooth-ish. And also, we want to make it small, but it should be zero when you make perfect predictions, right? So it must somehow end at zero. And so higher number is bad, and zero is best. But it can't be keep going down towards infinity or negative infinity, right? It has to be one point where we are happy, and that is loss equal zero. Actually, we are quite happy for bigger numbers as well, as long as it's small-ish. And then we had one thing that we know. So if we do regression, then we can define the mean squared error, which is just, well, basically says the error. So prediction minus the true. And then for technical reasons, we square it. And then we also take the mean, because we want, for all our data, we want one number out. So just average all of it, and then we get one number out. And it looks a little bit fancy in the equation form, because average looks a bit fancy with the sum and division and so on. But it's basically kind of the core of it is prediction minus true value, right? And then somehow transform it into a thing that has these nice properties that the best point is at zero. It's differentiable all the way. So it looks very nice. Yes, question. Yes. So yeah, for those on Zoom. So the question was, so if we square it, do we then punish large mistakes more than small mistakes? And yes, that is absolutely true. So you could envision that instead of squaring it, we just take the absolute value, right? So then it would still be zero as the minimum point, but it would go like linearly. So I didn't plot it, but just imagine a big V. So then it would be linear, which is differentiable. Technically not differentiable in this kind of apex of the V, but you can still do it. And then when you have a linear thing, it kind of, yeah, difference between some, yeah, how to formulate it. So essentially it means that if you make a certain difference here, that's the same as making a certain difference up there. But in this case, since we are not following kind of a V shape, we're actually rising, then it means, okay, the longer I go from the correct prediction, kind of the more quickly this thing rises. So I kind of say with this parabola that kind of, okay, if I'm in this area down there, we're kind of happy since it's a small mistake in other case, but the farther I go, the worse it gets, or the more quickly it gets worse rather. And that has some nice properties if you get into the statistics of it. But it's also the case that if you know that your data set has a couple of outliers, it has a couple of points that just are way off and difficult to predict, then these might dominate your loss, and that's not always what you want. So in particular cases, then you want to instead take just the absolute value, and then it's called the mean absolute error instead. And then you're not really making that big of a penalty to points that are a bit off. But usually if you expect your errors to be, or the noise in your data to be approximately normal, distributed, then this will be kind of your best unbiased estimator. So that goes a bit beyond the kind of, yeah, pencil for us. But yes, there are definitely many different variants of loss functions that you can use for regression, and this one considers it very bad to be a far way off. So perfect, that's the one for regression. But then actually very often we are doing classification, and then it's this different one that we typically use, which looks even more fancy because we have to sum twice, and it's called the cross-entropy loss. And we don't really have to discuss it that much, it looks like this, and it's kind of information theoretic measure of how well you did. But still, so if you did, well, perfect, this P is kind of a probability thing, not exactly, but close. So if you're perfect, then it's zero, like it should be, and then it rises non-linearly the worse it gets. So for if it's a binary case, then what you can do is either say, yeah, yes, positive, or no negative, and kind of one-off is the most error you can make. But we'll see that our predictions are typically some number on this line. So if you're very confident, you can predict one, but if you're kind of uncertain, you can predict 0.6. And then it still works, it's a nice continuous and differentiable thing. But since you can never kind of predict anything else than 0 and 1 for this binary case or any classification case, then we don't need to be kind of symmetrical on both sides. We just need to kind of the range between 0 and 1, so valid range. So yeah, I don't really want to discuss this in too much detail, you can read extra if you like. So the important thing is just, does it satisfy these things? Yes, it can be, you can find the gradient, and it goes at zero if you're entirely correct, and it rises if you're wrong. So typically we use this, but when implementing this in Keras, you have to make a choice if you're making multi-class prediction in case you will want to have the one that's called categorical cross entropy, or if you're doing binary, you want the one that is called binary cross entropy. But okay, basically they are kind of the same. And that allows us, so we have our network, which is function, and it's differentiable, and we have the loss, and it's differentiable, and

## Gradient descent (17:45)

everything is super nice, and we're happy about this. And then we can do the optimization bits, which is the time consuming bits, and the computational expensive bit, and it's the bit that we will spend most of the time on, actually, apart from actually programming up the implementation. So training a network for the models that we have, it could take like a couple of seconds, or it can take minutes, or when you get to the big language models, it takes typically a month on a data center. So it's, yeah, intense, computationally intensive stuff, so we want to do this as fast as possible, and as good as possible. So we mentioned this thing already, I think, so we had a look at this. So going up in loss is bad, going down is good, and this is the value of the parameter that then gives the best solution. And we iterate on this, I think we even had the code for this at some point in the first week, so we iterate on this, but you have to choose one thing, which is the step size, most commonly known as the learning rates. So this gradient, the funny symbol on L, it points in the correct direction, hopefully, but then you have to choose how far in this direction do I want to go. And then we had some issues, right? I promised last week, I think,

## Local minima (19:09)

that we solved some issues, and one of them is that you can get stuck in a bad solution like this. It seems like it's a solution, well, technically it is, because it's a local minimum, but when you are kind of goofing around in this region, then you're unaware of the much better solution, which is on the way over here. And when you keep stepping in small steps, the arrow kind of always points you towards this part, and then you get stuck in a solution that's a lot worse than what it could have been. So maybe your network wasn't really poorly designed, it was just poorly trained, and then it doesn't work, and it's hard to disentangle those two often. So now we want to solve these things, and we have a huge bag of tricks that you can apply, and just want to go through some of them. So if you go to the Keras web page, remember this, and then you click on, well, actually let's go from the beginning. So the landing page, you want typically to look at the API docs, and they only say, okay, here we can read about models, and layers, and something called

## Keras (20:27)

callbacks that we'll mention soon, I think. But then there's also a long list of these so-called optimizers. So you maybe recognize the one that's called SGD for Stochastic Radiant Descent, which is the one that we have talked about so far, which is kind of the, yeah, basically the plain version of what we already saw, that you compute the gradient, and move a step, and then compute the gradient, and move a step, and so on. But I wanted then today to look a bit more into some of these options, and how to basically improve, make it faster potentially. So it has a learning rate, and this we have to choose. There's a default for us, but yeah, we'll probably see that choosing this one, or testing different values is something that is quite important to the learning of our networks. So even though it comes with a default, it's probably not the best value for your particular case. So this is something we probably want to tune, but then it comes with some other cool stuff, which is called Momentum Nest Drop. So this we want to just briefly explain today, because this helps quite a bit. It does say quickly what this stuff is, but kind of like this one for instance, it just says whether or not to apply this thing, and it doesn't really explain us what it is exactly. Of course, we would get the solution just by chachi-pitting this, but let's now have a look in visual form how this works. And then also, if we go back, that was not the only one, right? There's tens of these,

## Optimizers (22:12)

all with funny names. If you paid attention more or less in notebooks, then you probably saw that we kept using this one for some reason, and it also has a million parameters and stuff. So, again, another choice for us, which of these to use to most quickly and best find the perfect solution, or the perfect parameters then for our nice neural network. So, because there is definitely a difference to these, this is one plot that shows some

## Comparing gradient descent algorithms (22:48)

some algorithms, a selection of algorithms, trying to find a small spot, but then we designed this a little in a little difficult way, so it starts in kind of this so-called saddle point thing, where the stochastic gradient descent thing, the red one, you can kind of see it starts off well there, but then it goes just back and forth, and it's stuck, and it doesn't really find this way, way lower point that all of the other ones does. So, I am a green one, it takes a little while before things get going, but this red one, apparently, it didn't really get all that close to the point that these other ones found. So, what is then? So, we always want to get to the lowest point, but then what is this magic that allows some of them to find this point as well, and more quickly? So, it seems like the yellow thing was super quick to get there, right? And second example, also a somewhat difficult example, and this red thing is the one that we're used to, but it's kind of moving extremely slowly, right? Although it does seem to find the point, it finds it a lot more slowly than other ones. It turns out for this problem, so the yellow thingy was quite good, but it wasn't the best this one. So, why are these different, and how do we get to, yeah, choose the best one? You can see one of these are kind of moving too far in one direction, and then turning and realizing it should actually go this way. So, this is kind of how it works. So, this is just stepping through a two-dimensional landscape then to find the best spot. Although for us, then we will rather have a loss landscape, as we call it, which does not have two dimensions, but it has a thousand, or ten thousand, or a hundred thousand, or close to a billion, or even many billion, once you get to these different language models. So, we need to do this, but we need to do it in super high dimensional space. So, then we can get to the first trick. If we looked at,

## Momentum optimisation (25:12)

yeah, first trick we could apply to stochastic gradient descent, or something called momentum, and this is a nice one. This is a super nice one, and it works like this. It's very, well, physics inspired, more or less. So, if you imagine you have a ball, it has some mass, and then you kind of start at this point, and then you just let it go, and it keeps rolling, right? And then this we have some intuition for, more or less. So, forces from gravity on this ball will point it in this direction, right? So, this is basically the gradient. So, the ball will be pushed in the direction of the blue arrow, and then it keeps gaining momentum, right? It's going faster, and then it takes more to stop it. And that is nice, because then when you get to this point, then gravity is actually pulling it towards this local minimum, which we agreed was not the best point to be. So, gravity is actually pushing it down here, right? But then because this ball was heavy, then kept rolling, and it keeps rolling still uphill for a while. So, you can imagine some like bowling ball or something, just kick it out there, and then it will gain momentum, and then keep going uphill for a while. So, just, yes, question. Good question. So, does the algorithm know, or does it remember, or kind of keep track of the lowest points? Typically, no, yeah. Yes, you could imagine, and no, it doesn't remember. So, then we have to be clever, and we'll also learn some tricks for this to stop it when it's at the best point. So, yeah, very good question. Generally, it does not remember the, by itself, the best point, and we have to stop it at what we consider the best point to be. But yes, so let's say, well, it keeps rolling, and then it passes over this bump, and goes down to the better spot. And yeah, it probably keeps rolling up here for a while, but then comes down again. And then we have to make sure that it doesn't just keep going, but we can introduce one thing that is a sort of friction that slows it down in the end, right, so it doesn't just forever go bouncing about this point, but it does, in fact, lose energy somehow, and end up at the best points. So, I can write it up like this, so you don't have to remember this. Yeah, towards the end of the semester, I will make a list of exactly the things you need for the exam, and what you don't need for the exam. But this is a little beyond what we need for the exam, I'm just putting it up. So, yeah, in case you're good at visualizing stuff from equations, then you see that we are doing gradient descent, but with an extra term that somehow pushes us in one direction or the other. But it comes with one new parameter then, which is something for us to choose, and typically it can be quite high, and it basically says how much friction do we have. So, if I kept, if you remember from physics, you know, conservation of energy and all this, if I kept it rolling from here, and there was no friction, then we could just go up, and then go back again, and so on, and keep going back and forth. Not ideal, it has to stop at the best point, right? So, then we just say, okay, we dial down the green arrows a little bit so that it kind of finally settles in the lowest points. But then there's one option, and it comes with a default in, no, this is the one that does not come with the default, but you can set it to 0.9 if you like, and then it works pretty well. So, it's kind of a nice thing because you have some intuition to it, yeah, you have a ball and keeps rolling, and most likely it will settle in the lowest points. But in case it doesn't, you yourself have to keep track of what we thought was the lowest points. So, that's cool. You can set it like this, yeah, so by default it was 0, but then you can add 0.9 as a typical value, or you can also try to scan different values and optimize this, of course. So, that's one trick, and then let's add

## Nesterov accelerated gradient (30:06)

another trick as well, which is even more fancy if you write it in equation form. But if we just tell you what this stuff is, then it gets easier. So, it's basically you do the momentum thing, which we had here, oh well, this one, but then you kind of seem to add a little bit of direction to it and just means, okay, when you compute the momentum thing, actually you look a little bit ahead before you compute it, which seems a bit hacky, and it is, but it also kind of works, which is nice. So, you can write all the details in the, if you still have this, what's called the Enhance On Deep Learning book that we used in dot 158, this is a figure from that book, and you can read a bit more if you like, but it's optional, it's outside of our book, but it kind of looks like this. So, if you did nothing, you would get the blue line, I wasn't really that good, but you can get inside of the black line and go there, and then when you decide for the next point, maybe if I look a bit ahead and kind of actually try to see where I'm going, then I can make a better choice and do the green thing instead of going outside of the optimal area. So, it's just kind of once you do the step, then you don't really know which direction is best, but you try to look in your kind of local neighborhoods by just going one step ahead of the momentum and then generate your new arrow. But you can guess that if you did the blue arrow, you would still get back, and yes, this one doesn't really improve the quality of your final estimates, but it is faster, and that's why they call the accelerated gradients. So, it accelerates stuff and it gets a little bit faster, and that is nice because computation is expensive and we want results as soon as we can. So, second trick, so first trick, just take a ball and let it roll, and then second trick was keep looking a bit ahead once you compute your new steps. And finally, okay, once we're into all

## AdaGrad (Adaptive Gradient) (32:24)

these tricks, let's do also one trick, because if you saw on the optimizers list of Keras, there were loads of these things that started with ada something. There was ada grad is one, and adam was one, and adam w is one, and there's loads of these these funny names, and many of them start with ada for some reason. So, let's just explain what this part means, and it comes from adaptive. So, somehow we make an adaptive gradient, and that means we actually tune the learning rate differently for the different parameters. So, if I have one parameter which goes down really steep, then I can reduce the learning rate quite quick, so we don't overshoot. While if something takes a really long time, because the gradients are shallow, then I can just tune up the, crank up the learning rate a little bit, and then go faster more or less to the to the point. So, for this one, so I have two parameters, and I can see I have to move along your distance along this one, then along this two thingy. So, this we can do, and then you'll see that for very nice behavior problems, it's a little bit faster, because yeah, since parameters affect us differently, they also look different in this loss landscape, and I can do better choices. So, that is cool, and sounds nice, and nobody is ever using this method anymore, because this is, yeah, it only works for very nice problems. So, you can kind of forget about this other grad thing right away. It's less sensitive to the learning rate, but then if you have a difficult problem, it typically kind of breaks down a little bit. So, okay, so why then do all of these methods have Ada in the name somehow? Well, it's because using just this trick doesn't really help you that much, but if you use this trick in addition to all these other methods that we saw, then you're kind of getting somewhere. So, actually, this one, don't really use it. There's a more clever way to do it, which is called RMSProp, which is, yeah, the name prop is for propagation of these things, and RMS is because you do the root mean square of, yeah, you look backwards to the previous gradients, and so on and so forth. But anyway, then you know what the adaptive bit is, that we actually look at, or we treat the different parameters slightly differently, which makes sense, because some of them are flat, and some of them are steep, and we just want the quickest solution. Also good, but also quick. And then we can take all of these tricks that we just learned,

## Adam (and friends) (35:27)

and smash them together, and try to do everything at once, and that brings us to this optimizer that we have been using for the notebooks, and that we most likely will be using some variants of. But basically, it takes the momentum thing, that's great, avoids these local minima often, and then you can do this adaptive part, but actually do it in a good way, and then you can do even more stuff, and then finally you have this thing called adaptive moment estimation, which kind of takes everything into one, and comes with some hyperparameters again, like we often do, but these are, I would say, fairly sensible defaults. So you can tune those if you like, but you can also leave them, and typically it will work out quite nice. So of course, to maximize confusion, if you look at different methods, they also have hyperparameters, and they are also called beta, and they do different things. So finding beta for one thing doesn't necessarily translate into a good beta for something else. But okay, historical reasons. Then, okay, so we had more than this, so we can actually tune it even more, although this other one is typically good for our type of problems, but you can do slightly different things. So you can, when you look at the past gradients, when you kind of look back at the history of where you have been, you can scale things a little bit differently in this adaptive bit, or you can add the Nostro thing, which is actually not default for Adam, but if you add it, it's Adam, obviously, or you can even do regularization combined in with both your model and your optimizer, and do it everything at once. And that kind of gives you this long list of things that are on the on the web page. So okay, in the end, so well, this is a bit beyond what we need for the exam, technically speaking, but it is absolutely something that we need when we get to the project, and we don't want to sit and waste days and weeks on training something when we could have just done it faster and better even. So that adds to our increasingly big toolbox of tools that we can use a bit more efficiently if we know how they work. But we get a lot of tools pretty quickly, right, so maybe let's look

## Comparison and guidelines (38:27)

at some guidelines for how actually to try and select this thing. So this is from this hands-on ML book from before, so if you still have it, you can have a look. But they basically try to write up more or less the balance of convergence speed to quality for these different methods. And if you get to the more fancy ones, they typically perform the same. So the standard gradient descent thingy, it's the slowest thing you can do, although it works quite nice for most things. But once we get into these more sophisticated ones, then they are as fast as can be, although at the downside of sometimes overshooting and missing the best points. So typically, they're perfectly fine. In other cases, they might be not entirely fine, but generally, they are more or less the same in terms of speed. So then, of course, except this one that we kept shaming, it doesn't really work that well unless you have very simple problems. And typically, we have different difficult problems, so let's choose one of these other ones. But we can say, okay, let's just first you set up your network and you get going, and then just do the adaptive moment estimation thing. This can be your first choice, and that's fine. And then you can see, did it work or did it not really work all that well? So if it did, then perfectly fine. If it did not, then this could be for many reasons, right? So you first have to, also at the same time, have to look at your network implementation, like is it meaningful, is the data meaningful? Did you put the correct labels for your data and all these things? And if you're convinced that, okay, this is perfect, it just didn't really learn that well, then we can look into why did this not really work that well. So things went haywire for some reason. You can try the other max thing, which did some clever tuning to kind of the history of where you have been, which can be nice in case you sort of start out in my spot, but then you end up at a bad spot. Or if things were actually a little bit too slow and you wanted to be faster, you can do, add the nester of trick to it. Yeah, and so on. If you need to regularize, there was one option that had this built in. Or if it seems like all of these fancy methods are actually kind of missing the best points that you want to find, so they are underfitting, right? You have a big model, but it doesn't really perform that well. Then you can go back to the OG standard, no, sorry, stochastic gradient descent, but then add this trick and try this instead. And so very often, actually, this will perform quite well, but we don't have time for waiting around for everything always, so we can start out with this atom as a nice trick. But this is something you can test. I mean, you have a nice range of things to test, and when you get to the project and you want to find the best possible model, then of course one thing to test is this part and check that you have a decent optimization of your network. So again, why is there no one true thing? Well, it's because all problems are slightly different, and then these are solutions to slightly different problems. But then let's finish it off with, okay, let's finish it off with

## Learning rate and loss curves (42:21)

pictures again, looking at learning rates and loss curves. This hopefully makes sense to you. So when we do the training, we do these different steps, right? And at each step, we want to know how well we did. So we compute the error or the loss function on statistically independent data. So we have a validation data set, and then we look at how we did. So it seems, okay, so we made somewhat big errors when we started out, not surprising. And then we tuned parameters step by step and things got better. And then as we keep tuning, we get in running over maybe same data 80 times or 90 times. And then we see that, well, it's actually not really possible to improve on our validation loss. So we seem to be at the best point we can be. So parameters, weights and biases of my network here is ideal, and I can stop and I can save my model and then use it to make predictions on new data. This is the ideal thing, right? It looks very nice, it increases and then converges at the best point. Now, the thing is, this is the ideal world and very often all other kinds of things happen. So maybe we get this, starts out nice, and then I have a seemingly okay point that's around 20 or something and then goes up. And that was very, very strange. So maybe my training loss keeps going down, but my validation loss starts to going up. And then we should immediately see the red flag called overfitting preparing on the screen, right? So this typical overfitting case. And this was bad. So actually I made my learning rates way too high, could be. So I'm overshooting the best points. Now I'm kind of working myself away instead from the minimum that I actually wanted to be at. So we kept moving in the best, in the good direction, but then I'm bouncing about and I don't really have any good parameters anymore. So turning the loss rates way too high was not ideal. Two big steps, stepping away from the best points after a while. So maybe you can think then, okay, so way too high learning rate was bad. Let's try it's really, really small just to be sure. But then again, you have to wait for a long time, ends up at some point, which was not even that good. And you have to keep waiting until this converges. And maybe it even converged at the local minimum because you don't really have the exploration involved that comes with good learning rates. So too low is also bad. You can have a different one that is, that it learns really fast and then it gets stuck somewhere it seems. Doesn't really go as far down as the green thing. So again, we had a little bit too high. So I'm jumping about the local minimum again. It's not as bad at this as this one, but it's still not as good as the other one. There are many things we can learn from just looking at these curves and see how they go. So typically they should decrease and stabilize, but they sometimes stabilize in a bad spot. So what can we do? So I want the speed of this blue thing, but I want the quality of this green thing. So then I can go in and adjust my learning rates dynamically at some point. So if I then have the red, so I start out learning really fast, high learning rates, and then I realize it starts tapering off. So then I can reduce it. So I'm close to my minimum. So I don't want to overstep or overshoot. So I can reduce the learning rates and then kind of quite quickly zoom in on the best spots. So even like this point, I'm doing better than the green one and that's a smaller number of epochs. So this is the ideal thing. Going in and doing stuff as fast as we can. Don't want to waste our time, but then adjust the learning rates so we don't overshoot. So this we want to try, and then there are many methods for doing so. So just quickly mention this right before we end.

## Learning rate scheduling (47:06)

So one thing you can do is, like this one, when you see that this is start flattening, then you go in and reduce. Now there is a Keras tool for it, which is called reduce learning rates on plateau, meaning kind of on when it flattens essentially. Then we want to dial it down and then start focusing on our best minimum. So okay, let's, since we only have one minute left, let's do a bit of reading on this on ourselves. Or maybe I can do it actually for each epoch. I just anticipate ahead that I will want to reduce it at some point. So just keep reducing it as we go. And then I would have many small breaks like this and just quickly go to the best spot, hopefully. Then I have to choose, of course, when to do this or maybe make some fancy rule to how to do this. Then you have to code a little bit more, but it's absolutely possible and it can look something like this. So if I just decrease it at fixed steps, I get this step in learning rate. So this is my learning rate and then kind of stepping down. And this usually works very nice. Then towards the end, I have to reduce how much I step by so I don't set it to zero and then nothing happens. Then you can think, okay, maybe if I do it the same thing, but as a linear line, this I can do. Let's call linear decay of this thing. Or turns out I can also do it in a quicker manner, like decreasing it soon in setting it high and decreasing it soon in the beginning and then dial it down after a while. And this also works quite well. Then this is a bit more advanced stuff and we are out of time. So let's end it there and then meet again at 10.15 tomorrow.
