# project kickoff and development tools
nd Yes. Put in a standard... He's working very hard. He has a goal when it comes to writing in layers. He doesn't have to do anything else. I hope you don't get sick from this. I'm just looking forward to it. It's going to be like three weeks. I don't think it's going to be normal. It's going to be... It's going to be for sure. I'm not sure if it's going to come. But if it's going to come, it's going to be okay. How's the treatment going? It's going to be okay. No, it's not everything. I'm not sure if it's going to be okay. It's going to be bad. I'm looking forward to it. It's going to be okay. So, with the video... I'm looking forward to it. I was thinking, but I don't know what to do. Something is coming up. How long have you been working on the cloud computing? I've been working on it for a long time, so I haven't had much time to think about it yet. It's a part of cloud computing. That's good. I've done it three times before. And it's not really cloud computing. It's basically just, okay, you're making a website with a little backup. That's not bad. No, it's not bad at all. Not at all. It's like... The problem with the cloud computing is that there are a lot of different engineering studios that can do it. That's nice. I'm on a group of people that I've never met before. It's like they've had a Python phone before. Because it was... And I have to do everything. On Python, not Java. I don't like that at all. No, it was... Yes, it wasn't that hard. In the song. I think I'm on time. Okay, I think we're on time. Yes, so I hope everyone is getting ready to work. Then next week, as announced, we do the first project week. I was hoping to do a second project week as well. Once we get a bit closer to, or potentially after Easter. But then this coming week will be important to just get everything started.

## Project kickoff (7:57)

So as you know, project topic is free for you to decide. It has to be something that is possible to accomplish within a reasonable time. But apart from this, it's basically all up to you. Your choice. So I have done only two guidelines, so it should be possible to finish this. And also, unless there's any specific agreement already, then please choose something where there is data available. So you know that you have some data, so you don't have to spend half semester looking for useful data and then end up rushing everything towards the end. So this is... Yes, there are different sources of nice data sets. Some examples are in this project catalog. In real life, of course, spending time on the gathering data will probably be the thing that takes the most time of such a project. But it's not really that interesting to us. We want to show that we know how to do these, or set up and train these deep learning models. So that's one thing. And I also suggest to find something which you think is fun, that you like. So you have some intrinsic motivation to do your best work on this. It's a lot more fun if it's actually fun. So these are the guidelines. And then we also have some various rules that we want to discuss today. But then, yeah, there's now one assignment on Canvas, which is to send in this thing. I'll show it again. Okay, yes, assignments. Not that many to select from, so it's hard to do it wrong. Select this one and then type in a very simple couple of sentences, a description of what you want to do. So even though if you pick something from this project catalog, please still send this in and explain a little bit what you want to do. So probably you want to maybe tune these things a little bit. So for instance, if you want to do the voice command assistant type of thing, maybe you want to do it for some particular use, or use a specific dataset that you found or something. So I was suggesting you can do something like play the game Snake, but you can also, of course, play other games with this. So feel free to adjust as much as you like. So these things are really just suggestions for something to get the creativity flowing. But then, yeah, send in this, and then you technically have also next week to think and then send it in by next Friday. So for those of you who submitted already, I think I went through those in yesterday at least and approved these. So it doesn't really take much to get approved. You just need something which is possible to accomplish. Then it comes to the actual rules for things and how you get graded for this.

## Assignment rules and grading criteria (11:27)

So as we know, hopefully, the grade in the course is 50-50 divided between the two-hour exam and then this project work. So if you follow this link, you'll find a lot of text on Canvas, and I can show it also right now. So here you will find some description of what you're supposed to do in the end. So you can read this yourself, don't have to show everything. Then there's a couple of things. So the goal of the project is for you to show that you learned something, of course, but it's easy to lose track of this goal once you're into it. But then just remember that we want to see if you are able to use the stuff that we went through in the course. So just the report is supposed to then show that you use things and are able to reflect and so on and so. Then there's also a list here of mandatory items. I will show it on the slides pretty soon. Recommended items, and I also have one highly recommended item. So mandatory, of course, you have to do it, and recommended is the stuff that will lift your grades so you get the best possible grades. Some requirements here. So you have to submit the report. There's various templates here for you to use. You can choose language freely. Okay, not too freely. You can choose between Norwegian and English. And then there's also a list of rules here that you can go through.

## Evaluation criteria (13:15)

And in the end, these are all the evaluation criteria. So this is what you will be judged by in the end. So if it helps you, then please have a look.

## Requirements for the submission (13:27)

Then these rules read through. And then I'll also discuss it a bit here. But I can mention now that because this is graded in the end, it has to go into the WiseFlow system. And the exam office will set up this WiseFlow link. So it appears for you once you log in to WiseFlow. And then this takes some uploads, one single PDF, I think. But we also want to see your code. So code goes to a GitHub or equivalent service. And then in your report, just stick a link to where your code is, and then we can evaluate everything. And also if you made a nice web app, deployed your system somehow, then also put a link to this and then we can have a look. But the final thing is this PDF that goes on WiseFlow. So it will not be on... Just to mention, it will not be on Canvas. It will be on WiseFlow in the end, this thing, since it's graded.

## Formalities (14:30)

Then, yeah, we discussed this. So 50-50 grades. And the way this is computed is that it's rounded up. So if you get a C on your project, but B on the exam, then your final grade is a B, unless you fail one of them, in case you fail the entire thing. So, yeah, do a good job on both of these. And also remember towards the end, yeah, it can be easy if you do a lot of good work on the project, that you relax a bit towards the end, but please don't. Practice properly before the exam and then everything will be, yeah, looking bright for your future. So then finally, we have these options for which dates to submit. So I didn't check how this is going right now, but until Friday, I think, I set up the poll for you to vote. So click the link, it's on Canvas and it's on the slides. I think I put the link almost everywhere. And then select your ideal date. Then again, it goes into Wiseflow, which means I don't have any control of this anymore, so you can't ask me for any extension or anything. This is now in the hands of the very strict people at the exam office. So then this, yeah, nothing for me to do in case you need somehow to extend this. Then you need the doctor's notes and everything and send this to the exam office. So this is just how it works, but usually this is unproblematic. And you can also submit many times. So once you have kind of draft one of the reports, you can just put it in Wiseflow and then when you update, you can upload a new one. So you don't have to wait until the last minute to update your report.

## Scope and expectations (16:33)

Okay, let's do then the list of things that you should do and have to do and probably also want to do. So the one thing we want to see is, well, the entire point is for you to choose some task and then solve with the deep learning, right? So these three points are there. So first, you should find the use case for deep learning. And we want in the reports to see like a little introduction of why you think this would be a good project to solve via deep learning methods. And then the next one is kind of the most important, which is for you to set up, design and train neural networks from scratch. So here we often get a lot of questions. So can I use a pre-trained model? Can I use existing architecture and so on and so on? And yes to everything, but you have to at least train one model, train and design it entirely from bottom up. So we want to see, are you able to effectively train a neural network from randomly initialized weights? So you have to show at least once that you're able to do this, set up a network in just completely from scratch and then train it and show me some loss curves and just essentially show that you know how this stuff works. But once you've done this at least once, you can do it as many times as you like, but at least once, then you can compare to all sorts of pre-trained models, anything you like. But you have to at least once show us that you know how this stuff works. And then the rest is open to you. You can compare it to any kind of things that you find online. And that's usually fun to see if you are somehow able to compete with the state-of-the-art models that you can download through Keras Hub and these equivalent things. And of course, you can take a pre-trained network and then modify it a little bit and test all these things, which tend to be actually quite fun to do. And then again, so point one, you set up a case. Point two, you made a network. And then point three is to test how well it did. And this is also one point where occasionally people get it a little bit wrong. So we ask in the template, state some metrics that you want to test to check that your network is performing as it should. And then sometimes people forget to actually give the numbers. So we still want the numbers, so we have to make a selection of metrics. Could be many different ones that you want to study. And then in the end, you have to state in the text or in a table or in a graph or somehow, how well did my model actually do? So these are the mandatory things. And they are in a sense, they are maybe a little bit obvious, but still just try to remember that you do all these things and not get distracted with other stuff and then forget that you have to train at least one model yourself. That's the mandatory bits, and the rest is for you to decide. And then you can compare different methods. So often people compare different types of models that we saw in the course or try to add in these types of, let's say, efficiency tricks like layer normalization or switch optimizers basically just look through the entire documentation of the Keras library and then try different things and see if there's something that works better than other things. Also, we will look at this today, try to use some tools for experimenting and looking at the performance of your model during training and comparing models and so on. So we'll look at some nice tricks for this today. And then finally, once you have your model and it does predictions, then we said, well, at least you have to do a kind of aggregate performance study in terms of metrics. But metrics give you one number usually, right? So if you're doing regression, maybe you want to measure the mean squared error, and that's one number for all of your data, which is okay. But maybe you want to also go in and look at some particular predictions that were very good or very bad or something, and just test some cases to see why did it perform as it did. So a lot of things you can experiment with here and you don't have to do everything. But in the end, you want something that's kind of a complete report. It doesn't have to be long, but it just should show that you more or less understand what's going on and you have some idea of why the model is working well or not so well. So there's absolutely not a requirement for good grades that your model is top notch. Even if it fails, as long as you can reason a bit on why it fails, then all grades are available to you. And then finally, put them in notebooks for this week. One example of one of these Python libraries that make it very simple to deploy your machine learning model as a web page, as an app that does something. So the example, well, actually took both of these frameworks, the one called Gradio and the one called Streamlit in this notebook number 15, maybe 16, I don't remember. And you can choose either you like. But it's also a nice bit of a nice topping to your project if you can deploy your app as a user friendly type of thing to show that you understand sort of the entire process of making a deep learning project or product in a sense. But then it says only very recommended because it usually helps your report to sort of make a nice package for how you solve your problem, going from kind of the initial problem statements to a final solution that people could potentially use. But if you want to do a more like a theoretic approach, maybe you want to get very involved in some technicalities of a certain model type and you find this to be the most interesting thing, then sure, you can spend all the time on that if you like and don't spend your time on making a web app for it. But this is again your choice. You can put as much work into this as you like. But at least always do these things and then please also do these things to improve your grades.

## Submission format (23:54)

Then in the end, OK, so there's a lot of stuff on the report now, but let's just go through it. So we know what we're supposed to do in the end. So reports template is on canvas and it basically says, well, I can show it. It basically says what we expect more or less for you to include.

## Project report template (24:12)

But you don't have to include everything. You have to put your candidate numbers on the front. And then there are some headlines here with some points that you can answer. You don't have to answer all, but typically you should at least consider all of them. I have to work out some title. That's fine. And then I want you to keep all the headlines, but then the stuff in italics you remove, but then write it in your own words. Like, so what do you intend to solve with this project? Which models will you try? Could you do it without deep learning and so on and so on? Also, then define what you consider to be success. And then in the end, also remember to give us the numbers. A little bit on data. So some points for you to reflect model implementation. This is a juicy bit, right? This is where you say why you chose to use these types of layers or that kind of architecture and so on. You can draw it if you like, and that is easy and careless. I forgot actually the function to draw it, but it's quite easy to draw up a graph showing your network. And then also here's the point. We want to see your code. It's evaluated as well. Not in the sense that we give you a low grade if your GitHub looks messy or anything. Absolutely not. So we don't really want to evaluate your coding style. We just want to see that you did stuff and spent some time in the implementation as well. Then, evaluation. You list all the numbers, probably some graphs, maybe other interesting things that you like. And then finally, if you have a web app, then just to describe how it works, put a screenshot maybe and some of the things that you find interesting or relevant to this thing. So you can add some points if you like, or you don't have to answer all of the points, but these are some inspiration at least for what we expect to see. A little bit of a conclusion is also nice. So again, your projects don't have to be a success, but you have to be able to state whether or not it was a success. If it kind of fails, then perfectly fine, but please add some words on why you think it went bad or could have gone better and so on. Then finally, code. We want to check this. Don't really put too much emphasis on the style and clean tidiness and all this. Just want to see that you were able to implement this in a reasonable way. So this is what we want. And then again, reports in PDF format is the only thing you can upload in Wiseflow. So also just put links to the codes and your web app if you have one as well in the reports. Okay, then also some questions. Of course, also available then all of next week. At this given time to answer some questions, but some of them I can answer right away. So the classic one, can I copy code from wherever? Yes, of course you can, but you have to cite your sources. It's important. Anything that goes into Wiseflow also automatically goes into this text similarity checking tool. So you will get flagged if you copy and paste directly. So second thing, maybe more relevant, can I use some AI tool? Yes, you can also do that. But then again, just make sure that you don't copy and paste. We don't really like this. And you can look a bit more on the extensive guidelines at HVL if you like. But typically, use AI for what you need to get started with the project. Often it's very nice to ask some questions like how would you do this or that, but in the end, don't copy and paste text. Nobody's interested in reading your chat GPT text, but it's still very good tools to structure and work on your project. So it's not that we don't like you using AI, but we don't like reading AI text. Then pre-trained models. So I'm going to say it again. I'm going to say it many times during the semester. Yes, you can and probably also should use pre-trained models to compare, but you have to train at least one model all the way. From bottom up, from randomly initialized weights, just to show us that you are able to do so. And also a bit more on the technical side. So if you take a pre-trained model, but you scramble the weights, basically then just keeping the architecture. Can you do that? Well, it's also on the risky side. Please make some change to it. So you can see for yourself that you fulfill this requirement of really just designing and training a model from scratch. And then once you did this, compare to anything you like. Also a final one. Can I skip the training and then just point my web app to some external tool? Again, no, but you can add it if you like. So all additions to... Yeah, you get it. As long as you do this, you can add all bells and whistles and additions that you find interesting. Absolutely no problem, but you have to train at least one model from bottom up and then all the extra stuff you like is perfectly fine. So I think that was most of the stuff for the questions. So again, everything is on Canvas. And if not, I will put it there.

## Next week: Project week (30:48)

I'm pretty sure I put everything on Canvas now. As you saw, there's a long list of stuff. But these are kind of technicalities around the basic rules of mandatory and recommended things. But still, please have a look so you make sure that you don't miss out on something. But then for the next week, it's all work, work, work. So no lectures. No lectures Monday. No lectures Tuesday. No notebooks for the lab, but I will be on the lab. And also posted a room number for these lecture hours where I will be so you can come and ask questions if you like. So I'll probably not be there outside of these lecture and lab hours. So then you have to send me something on Discord or other places. But if you are on Zoom and you would like to ask questions, I will also be available on Zoom. I'll probably not sit logged into Zoom at all times. So then just ping me on Discord if you want to talk directly. So then week after, we get back to learning new stuff. And then we do the language part, which is the final major thing to the course. So we did images. Very important. We did time series. Did a little bit of this tabular data. But then we get back to what's called natural language processing. So basically making a chat-chip type models. So that would be very cool. And then towards the end, I was hoping now then to do another project week, second week of April right after Easter. We'll see if we have to move it or not, but it would be convenient. So then you can really do the last effort on your project. And then we get into the more exotic stuff of generative deep learning towards the end, which is slightly more difficult, of course, slightly more resource intensive, but also a lot of fun. But that's for the coming part. So still have more fun remaining and start doing this week after next week. So I think that was all I wanted to say about projects. Any immediate questions about project stuff? Otherwise, we can also discuss it next week. But hopefully the goal of the project is kind of clear, right? Do some deep learning and show that you understand how it works.

## Remember to think about your future (33:51)

Also wanted to for those who are in the right spot in life where you have to make some choices for your future. There's a lot of stuff in deep learning that you can do for a full year or two years, if you like, either on the master program in software development or this applied engineering, computing and engineering master. So both of these are quite good options for you if you want to keep doing some deep learning. And the application deadline is 15th of April, as usual. So just putting it out there in case it's relevant to you. Have a read and see if this could be something for you.

## The ML project lifecycle (34:39)

But then we have some 15 minutes before we take a little break and then we look at some tools. Maybe we don't even have to spend all our time here so we can do lunch a little bit early. But now I'll put up a good old graph if you followed the previous course, that's 158 of the machine learning project life cycle. And if you didn't see this before, it's perfectly fine. Let's just quickly discuss. So it's showing the cycle, more or less, of doing a deep learning project. Could be any machine learning project, really. That usually goes in a loop because you have some data processing, start collection and processing of data to begin with. Then you do all your data modeling. And then in the end you make a cool app and some way to monetize or otherwise capitalize on your results. And then probably you will not be at the end with a complete perfect product. But you want to redo these cycles to keep improving on your machine learning model, depending on the stuff that you learned going through all these phases. So for us in the project, we want to definitely do this thing to kind of understand what we're doing and what we're trying to solve. Don't have to write too much about this in the report, but we want to, starting from what we're trying to solve, make some reasonable conclusions about how we would like to solve it. And then we have all the data cleaning stuff, big or a small X on this one. Please don't spend time on too much on the data collection, but exploring data is good, of course. So getting data, this should be quick, hopefully in the project. Exploring data and feature engineering, you can spend some time on if you like. But this blue part at the bottom is the big deal, right? This is where we want to see you exploring a lot of models. Once you have done this, then you can fine tune the best ones, make ensembles and all these things we know. And then do the evaluation and towards the end, make an app and see if this is some product that solves something for an end user. But we are kind of liberal in the project in that sense that if you want to spend all your time doing the blue little things there, that's fine. If you want to make a full project showing that you master all the elements, even better. But you can choose more or less what to focus on as long as you do all the stuff that is mandatory for the final project reports. But then, if we look into this blue box and also to some extent the orange box, exploring machine learning models is a big thing. We want to test different things. For many problems, we have some kind of idea where we should start. So if I want to classify images, then convolutional neural networks would be a good start. But there are still a lot of options for how I can construct such a model. So often, usually, always, you end up testing a lot of stuff. And then it doesn't really take much testing before you see that, ah, I actually forgot what I did for the first thing. The second model was really good. I forgot to save it. And then you end up with all these things that you wish you had done better from the start, maybe. So then we want to today look at some tools that can help you in this project. So if you had been now working in, I don't know, microbiology or something, then everybody knows you have to have this book that are your lab notes. Then you write down all the time what you do so that once your experiment succeeds, then you actually know how to reproduce it. So you're not stuck and not able to reproduce your nice experiment. And the same thing goes for us, really. It would be nice if we can somehow keep track on everything we do and then manage to reproduce it later. So that would be good. And then it comes to the thing of experiment tracking.

## Experiment tracking (39:27)

So there are lots of tools for this. It could, of course, be as simple as you just putting numbers in a text file. But there are various nice graphical tools that we want to show now and after that kind of want to answer different things. So first, if you start your first experiment, then often in deep learning it takes a while to run, right? So you don't want to waste too much time training a model that doesn't work or you want to stop it once you start overfitting and all these things. So there are various tools that you probably want to look at to basically diagnose your model once it is training. And then the easy thing would be to look at the loss curves, right? We had a couple of loss curves that we looked at in the past and then we could see, OK, if it goes down, then good. Once train and validation starts diverging, that's bad. Sometimes you end up at the plateau and you could keep training forever, but doesn't really help. All these things would be nice to basically be able to monitor once you are in the process of training. And we also see some cases that you train very nicely, then all of a sudden things explode and then your used to be a good model is now broken and everything is very, very sad. And then it would be nice if you can monitor and go back. If you make checkpoints, as you call it, then you would know when to go back and restore your model weights. So there are many, many things in the process here that are not really, let's say, not really theoretically motivated. It's just a part of the experimentation business. So this would be nice if we have some tools to look at how the model is performing once we started it. Of course, if you know it's going to go well, you can just start it and then go and have dinner on something and come back to it. Nicely trained model, but once you're getting a bit creative in your model building, then it might be good to look at it during training as well. So then if this succeeds, you have a nicely trained model, then in the end you want to compare. And since you probably have a lot of models, it would be nice to look at different aspects of these and then select the best ones. And of course, as I mentioned, once you have a model that works really well, it's good if you can also manage to reproduce the configuration and the settings of this model. So you can actually identify what kind of things was a success. Then also the final, most maybe difficult question to answer, if it did in fact work, if it was a good model, why exactly did it work? And it's mentioned quickly in the book, I forgot where, maybe chapter five.

## Fundamentals of machine learning (42:48)

Fundamentals of machine learning, we read this and then we had a look at, I'm scrolling through all of this. We had a look at these loss curves, so these we want to monitor during training. But then there are also different tips there that you should probably pay attention to. But the final one I was looking for is the part, this little blue text called, I forgot what it is. But somewhere if you search for it, it's the concept of ablation studies, which if you want to publish your model at a machine learning conference or in a machine learning journal, typically you want to do this. And ablation basically means removing stuff and see how it works. So you could say, okay, I should admit this is kind of next level stuff, but it could be interesting if you're aiming quite high with your reports to do. If you look at some model that you made, maybe you had some residual connections, for instance, then a way of doing a so-called ablation study would be then go in and remove some layers, possibly remove the residual collections maybe, and just keep removing stuff and see how performance changes. Because this is kind of your only experimental way to see which component of your model was in fact important to your performance. So if you keep removing stuff and nothing changes, but then finally remove the one layer and everything breaks, then you know that this layer is going to be quite important to your model. And then you you learned something about why this thing works. So that is pretty cool. And you can do it. Let's say it's optional, but it would be very nice to see. Okay, so final final bit. So we did some training. We looked at the performance of training and then we want to try training something new again. And then we want to ideally, of course, make a model that is better than the past one. So we should make some changes, but these are hopefully changes in the good direction. And how do we know? Well, if there are some, let's say relation between my choices of hyperparameters and performance, then I want to move in the direction of better hyperparameters, of course. So also selecting these typically in your deep learning model, you have probably thousands of hyperparameters to change. So how would you go about to find good ones? This is also something we'll have a quick look at after. So these are kind of the big steps where the core of our experimentation comes into play and we want to make as good choices as possible and also make the most efficient choices. So you don't have to train one million different models to come up with one that is good.

## Tools for experiment tracking (45:57)

But then, okay, let's have five minutes so we can spend five minutes more on looking at tools for experiments tracking. So the different ones. So now I will not say that one of these are better than the others. You can test yourself and see what you like. Just flashing some options and then if you can see later if any of these are suitable for your project. So one of the standard ones is TensorBoard, which, as you can guess from the name, is pretty closely related to TensorFlow. And therefore it also integrates quite nicely with Keras and these things. And it gives you the option to make nice loss curves, plot accuracy, plot the gradients of your model, if you like, to get track of these. And this is usually quite easy because you can add it as a so-called callback to your Keras model. So this one is kind of the most easy to get started with, but it seems more or less now that it's not really being developed anymore. So it has a bit limited functionality. And if you want to get very fancy with your experiment tracking, you might want something that is a bit more modern than this one. But still, if it's a bit out of development at the moment, it still works and it's still nice for a quick start to looking at these tools. So basically you add it as a callback to your Keras model and then it starts the web server in the background and you can just go in on your machine and look at it. Added like so. I'll show you very quickly. One of these callbacks, right? And there you'll find it, TensorBoards.

## Keras (47:48)

And it's added like, where do they add it? Yeah, just like so. Type a callback and then you have to specify one thing, which is where exactly do you want to store the outputs. And then you just run .fit as usual with this thing in the background. And then you go to, does it say? No. You go to localhost8888 or something to see these graphs. Yeah, and they look more or less like this.

## TensorFlow (48:33)

So it's nice because it's super easy to get started. I mean, it's kind of, you have to install, pip install TensorBoards, I think. But apart from this, it's kind of more or less built in. So it's very convenient in that sense. So it's quick to get going. And then if you need something more, you might want to look at some of these other ones. I think one of the more popular one is called weights and biases. And this is kind of a duplicate thing. Well, not duplicate, it's a multifunction thing is what I mean to say. So it allows to do experiments tracking, but also hyperparameter optimization in one. So it has a lot more functionality in that sense. What we can say, so TensorBoards, you just start and everything is fine. Well, for weights and biases and these other ones, you will need an account, I think. So it's a commercial product. If you use your student email for setting up the account, it's free. But still, it's not a completely open source thing if you want to do something which is which is more open. Final thing before we take the usual break is another one, a kind of similar thing called aim. This one is completely open source, if I recall correctly. That's kind of the same thing. But you do have to run it in low closed, I think. Yeah, I forget. But there are different options and loads of these ones. So as you can see, from the just share amount of tools, that this is a popular thing. So once you get a little bit serious about deep learning, then you probably want to also get serious about using some of these tools. So loads of them and you can have a look which which suits you or just take the first one. I think that was this for experiment tracking. So then let's do a 15 minute break until quarter past 11. And then we look at the remaining bit, which is hyperparameter optimization. Yes, OK, let's start back up. So these are all these different options. You can look at these are links if you click them for tracking experiments, which is well, absolutely up to you if you want to do or not, or just suggesting things that can make your life easier.

## Hyperparameter optimisation (52:21)

And this is a popular thing. So many options exist. But then we get into the business of something one should should definitely try to do, which is to optimize the hyperparameters of your of your network. And then we have the problem. So the parameters themselves, we optimize via gradient descent. And that was possible because we were able to define the entire neural network as a function. And then we had a loss function. And if this was differentiable, then we can differentiate the entire thing. And then gradient descent is possible for us because the we can compute this gradient that points us towards a better place. This we can, however, not do with these hyperparameters. They are generally not something that we can we can differentiate and optimize. So then we just have to test. But then testing is typically expensive. Right. So one experiment is then training one model and that can take anything from, well, you know, a minute up until many days. So this is this is an expensive thing. So we want to squeeze as much as possible information out of one such experiment as we as we can before we move on to the to the next one. And there are many different methods for this, but we can look at first the most basic ones. What I can add also, there is a Google deep learning tuning playbook, as it's called, that has some tips and tricks if you want to look. So this is, again, a link. And it looks more or less like this if it can load.

## Machine Learning (54:09)

Just a bit of text really from experts at Google if you want to read about this. Some guides for starting a project and then doing various things, selecting learning rates and so on. So this also might be interesting to you if you want to optimize your training process. So, again, just a suggestion for things you can read. Not not mandatory, but if it's if it's useful for you, then please have a have a look. OK, so what is the simplest thing? We just test many different values.

## Hyperparameter optimisation: Grid scan (54:45)

So maybe I have to make it simple, maybe I have two different hyper parameters, which can be, I don't know, regularization of weights and regularization of biases, maybe something I could I could test. And then the kind of most intuitive thing would just be kind of test certain numbers in a fixed grid. So if I test point one and point two and point three and so on, then ideally should have a very structured approach to testing all possible values. And this one is kind of nice because it's so simple. So defining where you want to search is just making a linear spacing of all your different hyper parameters. And then because each point doesn't really depend on the result from the neighboring points, you can just run it all at once if you like. So you can parallelize this thing and train. So if you have the capacity to train ten models at once, you just take ten of these points and train it at once. So in principle, sounds sounds good in practice. It's not really super useful, this one. The point is, I don't know if you've heard about this term, but we have a so-called curse of dimensionality, which relates to all kind of optimization and simulation and whatnot kind of things. Once you keep adding different type of parameters, then you're adding different axes. And once turns out, mathematically speaking, when you go into higher number of dimensions, the distance between the points just become longer. So if I have now instead of two hyper parameters, I have ten, then the distance between each point gets really far. And I have to add in even more points, do more experiments to get a usable grid. And then you can also imagine, so maybe this hyper parameters is not something defined between zero and one, but maybe it can go from, I don't know, minus infinity to plus infinity and something. And how do you make a nice grid out of this? That's a bit tricky. Also, you can see if we, okay, this is just visualization, but you can see that's okay. So each cross is one experiment or one setting then of hyper parameters. But none of these really found the best spot, which is this one, presumably. But they found kind of the neighborhoods of reasonable parameters. So the simple grid scan, do it maybe only if you have a very simple model with very few hyper parameters, then you can do a kind of full scan. But if you have more than, I don't know, three, usually it doesn't really turn out to be very efficient. So what can we do? Well, there's one thing that is actually maybe counterintuitive, but works better, which is to just pick points entirely at random. And then instead of this nice fixed grid, which was maybe appealing to people who like things to be very fixed and rigid and systematic, then just picking points at random can be usually quite much more performant in cases it gets you there quicker. You can see this just a simple visualization. This point got closer to the best point, actually. And otherwise, it's just randomly scattered. It's still kind of simple and you can still parallelize because it doesn't require you to do one experiment and then do the next. You just do all at once, if you like. And it is, in fact, a more effective approach to finding good hyper parameters. But then still, I mean, if you want to find the exact best point for these two methods, you have the option of doing the grid scan, which will not find you the best spot typically, but it converges in finite time. Or you can do random, which can give you the best spot, but in infinite time. And usually we don't have infinite time to sit around and wait to find the best points. So you should in general do this over a grid search or the simple grid search. But even better would be if we can take each result and then somehow guess a better approach for the next test. And that would be different methods for this.

## Hyperparameter optimisation: Intelligent choices (59:42)

But now we're getting into the domain of gradient-free optimization. And optimization is a super popular thing, so there are many options for this. Have you heard about these things like evolutionary algorithms or Bayesian optimization or other things like this? And these work in the way that you start out with one experiment and then you do the next. And then you see, was there an improvement or not? And if yes, you try to sample them in the neighborhood of the better points. And then if you keep doing this in the end, you'll typically have most of your attempts in the best possible spots. So in this case, you take information from your previous test and then use this to guide your next test. And then the problem is, well, you can't parallelize this anymore because you need to know the previous result before you go to the next. But usually that's fine because you maybe just have the capacity to run one model at a time still. So it doesn't really limit your efficiency that much. So this is a lot more efficient. There are many frameworks for this, many approaches. Can't parallelize it to the same extent, but still it's going to be more efficient typically. So such intelligent choices would usually be what you go for just straight away. And there are different frameworks for this. So let's look at some of these. So finding a good model, still for relatively simple things. You have many things you can change, right? So if I have my silly convolutional cat detector, then I can still adjust how many layers I want, how many nodes I want for the final classification layer and blah, blah, blah. So usually I get, yeah, for even simple cases, I get to the point where I should probably use one of these type of search algorithms. Here is a little illustration of how it works for what we call Gaussian processes, which is here tested for regression. And once it starts, it tests a couple of things, but then it tries to test good points that enable you to squeeze these uncertainty bands as most as you can. So we basically look at the point where do I expect the most improvement, and then you test there. So here I have high expected improvement, so I test that one and then I keep going. Then in the end, I try to efficiently search through all the best options. So you have a deal there. So again, a trade off between how much should I explore and how much should I go in the direction of what seems the most promising. So again, you can't really get rid of all hyperparameters when there's even a hyperparameter for your search. But OK, simplest thing maybe to implement is called Keras tuner. So no surprise, it's integrated quite nicely with Keras. So for us, that would be relatively easy. So in this case, if you would look at this model, I have a sequential model and it's that simple. It has only these dense layers like so. And then to optimize hyperparameters, I add, for instance, this line that suggests an integer value between these bounds that I say. And this integer value, then I take as input to my first dense layer, for instance, if I want to figure out how many nodes should I have in my dense layer. So instead of me saying directly different numbers here, I get the framework to suggest a good value. And then I can train and then when I do it again, it will suggest a better value and then keep going, suggesting better values for how many nodes or units, if you like to call it units, I would need in my first dense layer. And then maybe for the optimizer, I want to do the same thing, but just showing how that would be. So if I define that you should choose between these three options, then I can specify these like so. So I want to say, OK, you can only choose among these and then Keras tuner will select the best one amongst the options that I specify. So I can make many such suggestions at once. So typically I should search for everything at once, right, because I don't know how these correlate. So I want to set up my search space so that includes everything that I think that I want to vary. So then this function will build a model and then return it. And then I can test it in the end, looking at the accuracy, for instance. And then I just keep training new models and it will suggest better parameters in between each time. And here you can get a bit creative, like so I could have a for loop that would add a certain number of layers that are suggested and so on. So there's a lot of stuff in the in the architecture that I can make Keras tuner suggest for me. So again, link here, it's just part of the typical Keras thing. No, sorry, you have to pip install Keras tuner, that's true. But then you can run it and the docs has again this simple example of how to get going. So that was the one option, which is then, yeah, again, maybe simplest to get started. So if you just want to get started with these things, you can use Keras tuner and you can use TensorBoards. And these are usually quite, quite nice. But then again, there are always options with more functionality. Oh, yeah, I forgot to say there are different optimisation options for that you can that you can select from Keras tuner. Bayesian optimisation is maybe the default, I think. But there are different ones. But then there's also a popular open source thing which is called Optuna, which is quite common. So it also suggests you some some numbers and then you take this as inputs. It comes with a nice extension to Visual Studio Code if you want to use that. That gives you some various plots, even set up one here for a thing I did in the past. You can see how Optuna works. And it gives you the main landing page, gives you a graph here that shows how well did each of your model perform. So each point is a model. Then you can see, OK, I have one model which did really bad. Most of them are quite good. And then I can go in select which of my models and the general best one in this in this red curve. So I get an overview of all my models. And if I hover above, it says the configuration of this model. And that is nice. So I can remember which of my or I can select the best model and read out which configuration I used. So I can have a look at how long they took to train. And also very nice, I can look at an estimate of the importance of each hyperparameter. So in this particular case, maybe a bit tricky to read. I was testing if the learning rate was important, if the number of layers was important, if the number of nodes was important and so on. Also batch size and a couple of things. And then turns out changing the batch size had zero effect for me. So that is something I don't really have to pay too much attention to while the learning rate was super important. So this is something I should then spend more time on optimizing. So it gives you a couple of these things that are nice to look at so you can optimize things and being also efficient about it and not spend too much time optimizing things that don't even matter. But then on this importance, there are different ways to calculate. So if you want to, you can study how these different ones work. But at least they give you an indication of your most important hyperparameter. And also, for instance, this is my measured error on the best trial and my options for this. I think I can also study it. I can also have a list of all my different experiments with the settings. So this keeps track of this for me so I don't have to sit and sit and write down for each case what I tested. It just gets recorded. And so there are different visualizations for me to select, try to plot how things vary. So if I look at learning rate and number of layers, I can look at this plot for the optimal spot. And I see that I have many experiments which was in a space that didn't really affect the performance too much. But then in the end, I found these spots which are good, I think. No, sorry. I was saying the opposite direction. I misread the graph. So this was the worst spot, but I have many trials in reasonably well performing areas.

## Hyperparameter Relationships (70:03)

And there are lots of plots that you can go in and check. So if you really want to study these things and make intelligent choices for your hyperparameters, there are lots of things for you to play around with. And this again also, it just runs on my machine. So I don't really have to do much except for pip installing the Optuna framework itself. So this one gives you a lot of nice plots. So you can spend some time on optimizing and improving a model based on this. So I could say, OK, then many of these, they do kind of both two things. They optimize your parameters and they manage your experiments and allow you to keep track of stuff that you did. So you don't forget all the settings you had for the best models that you tested. So again, some options here. You don't have to explore all of them, but at least you know that they exist. Ray is one thing that is kind of nice. Then set up your search space in a dict and then run it from there. Otherwise, it's basically the same thing, but it has some more methods for optimization, I think. Here's an example with Keras, for instance. You can read yourself, but it works with most frameworks, which is nice. And it has some different optimization methods, some which are better in some cases than others. If you just use one of them, at least then that's a lot better than nothing. So that was some of these development tools that we wanted to show. So for the final few minutes, we don't have to go through all of these. I would just also like to highlight some things that you might most likely maybe even want to customize when you start working on your projects. So most of these things are listed in Chapter 7, but this is one of the chapters we read quite early, so maybe we forgot a couple of things. But there are many things that you can customize once you get technical with your model. So let's just refresh a little bit on things that could be interesting to change, and then we can try to end a little bit early before lunch. But again, Chapter 7 goes through many of these, and also the Keras webpage shows you basically how to do most of these things. But in the spirit of paying attention to how the model performs during training,

## Custom callbacks (72:54)

there we have these things that we call callbacks. And these are nice because you can do things like save your model during each epoch in case you start overfitting. Then you can return to the best performing model, which is nice. Or you can stop it if it shows signs of overfitting and all these things. So often you'll see that the model kind of breaks for various reasons, and then it doesn't really help to keep training it for hours on end when it's already in a kind of broken state. So it's nice to do some things in the form of callbacks. And they basically look at what is the model doing for each epoch or for even each batch, if you like. And here you can do things like log the gradients or log the accuracy or whatnot. So there are a couple of these that are available directly on Keras. Look at this callbacks API. The model checkpoint, that is the one that keeps saving your models as we go. Backup and restore, I think this one will restore your model weights to the best state, which can be nice. And early stopping is one of the ones that you probably always want to use, which just stops the training if you start overfitting or when you're not really improving anymore. So then it can be nice to just stop there and then redo training from different starting points. So this you often want to do. And then if you're getting a little bit more fancy, you can do things like adjusting the learning rates dynamically. So you often see that if a learning rate is high in the beginning, you move fast towards the optimum, which you want, of course. But then you probably want to dial it down a little bit so you don't overshoot your optimal model parameters. And then there are all sorts of other things that you can look into and also define yourself if you want to. So it doesn't really take much. If you subclass Keras.callbacks.callback, then there are some functions that you just implement. So if you want something to happen when you end the training, then you just define this function and nothing else. And then this will be triggered once you get to the end of training. So you don't have to specify all of these. You can specify only or customize only the function that you need if you want to do something on start of each epoch or end of each epoch or something. Maybe I want, for instance, to classify some test images at the end of each epoch just to test some examples. That could be something I want to implement, and then I would plug it in here. Also, metrics is something that you maybe want to plug in.

## Custom metrics (76:03)

We can, again, have a look at what are available. So metrics, there are accuracy for classification, for instance, different regression metrics, and so on. And then there are lots of other ones which are intended for different tasks like image segmentation, we know we have a couple, and so on. But it can be, again, that you have some custom use case where you want to put in your metric, and then implementing it, it's not too hard. So as long as you specify these metrics when you set up your model in this .compile, then these things will be triggered automatically. So you don't have to call the functions. You just have to write the function, and then it gets called for you by Keras, which is quite convenient. Again, there are these couple of functions that you need to define, like updateState is one, and result is one. And then you can plug in here any function that you like, or you can pick it directly from scikit-learn, because scikit-learn has more metrics if I recall correctly than what Keras does. So if it turns out, ah, it was only available in scikit-learn, then it doesn't really cost you too much to implement it also in Keras. And also if you need a bit of help on putting different calculations in here, then ChatGPT is very happy to help you with this. As we looked at the final thing that you might want to customize

## Custom loss functions (77:51)

is the loss function that you use. And this one, again, also even simpler to implement than metrics, if I recall correctly. So again, you can subclass this Keras.loss, or just write some function yourself that takes predictions and true values in. So all loss functions that just compare two things, which is predicted and true. Okay, that was not a general statement. So loss functions can compute anything, but most likely we want to compare the predicted and true. And then you just need to remember one thing, which is not the case for metrics, but it is the case for loss functions that you have to make some function that we can differentiate. So if I want to implement mean squared error myself, it's kind of straightforward. But usually I want to use what is in Keras or what is in TensorFlow or some other library that gives me vectorized operations. So loss functions, so this you have to compute all the time for all your batches, for all your epochs, for all your data points. So you have to typically compute these functions here many millions of times, so then it helps us if it's fast to compute. So putting in stuff here like for loops or if statements and so on, typically not a good idea because it takes a long time to compute. So if I use these vectorized operations that TensorFlow has, so tf.reduceMain, this one computes the mean value, which is technically a sum, but we don't implement it as a sum. We have just this vectorized operation and it does it for us. Then this is going to be a lot faster than writing it out by hand in pure Python. So usually no pure Python in these loss functions if you want this to go fast. But then you can write this in TensorFlow if you use that. So typically we use this for the notebooks, but you can also find that keras.ops has various functions, simple mathematical functions that you could also use for these things. And this will usually pick the corresponding function from the backend like TensorFlow, but then it's also more general that you can use any backend you like. So in case you want to customize, then it's relatively simple to do so, I would say, but please stick to these vectorized operations.

## Custom layers (80:51)

Finally, it also layers, of course, so this can be the last thing we look at. So in some cases you want to have a layer that does something and it can be a scaling or it can be a multiplication or in this case doing the exponential function. And if it's just a simple function, hopefully you have been exposed to this lambda notation. So there's also a layer called lambda which implements this very simple. You just type the computation that you want. And then this is one layer. I can use it in a stack like so. So just put my layer in there and then everything is good and I can keep training. And that really didn't require me to do anything else than specifying a computation. But once I get a little more complicated and I want to have actual weights in my layer, if I want my layers to actually learn anything and not just compute, then it gets a tiny bit more tricky because the three different functions that I have to define myself. So again, this is something where ChatGipT is very happy to help, but I have to do the init function like for all classes. And I want one build and one that is call. And call is the one that does the actual computation while build will set up the weights that I need. So in this case, I have implemented myself just a standard dense layer and it didn't really require much more than this. Again, if you have some special needs, then you can do this. And it's usually quite fun actually once you have these things going and you're able to do all sorts of custom stuff while still within the simple training loop of Keras. One thing I should mention, once you keep adding your own weights and stuff, there is this option called trainable, which you should set equal to true in case you wanted to be optimized. And if you wanted to just be fixed values, then set this equal to false and then it's a constant. I think that was close to it.

## Custom models (83:12)

Also custom models. Final two minutes on models. So we saw when we kept dealing with these residual connections that we had to connect the input with the output. And that defines one block. And usually it makes it quite tidy if I just take this block and put it in a function. Because then I can call this function for as many times as I like. So if I want a 10 layer network, I call this function 10 times. And if I wanted 20 block network, then I call this 20 times. And then I just have to do that in a loop instead of actually typing it out 20 times. So customizing your models and the architecture is quite simple. So you're allowed to use functions and you should use functions. And you can also rewrite it completely as a custom class if you want to do so. And then in case of... And instead of having this functional thing that you just go through the layers, you would have to put it into the call function. So call is what is, well, technically even called once the layer is run. So you have to put it in this structure because it's what Keras expects. So it will call all the relevant functions for you as you go. So making a super custom, super fancy model doesn't really require that much. And if you're getting into the deeper end of deep learning, then it's going to save you some time in coding if you write it up in functions that you can call in a loop or a class. Instead of literally just specifying each layer 20 times. So you can do a lot of fun stuff as long as you have one input starting at some point and one output and then put it into a Keras.model. And as long as the computational graph can be constructed, then you're good to go. And Keras will differentiate and train and be very happy about all these things for you. So I think that was the end. Yes. So let's do lunch a little bit early and then next week no lectures, unfortunately. But then keep working hard and remember to send in your suggestion for project topic. And then I will go ahead and approve it as quick as I see it. So let's end it there for today.
