# image segmentation
I'm testing, I'm fixing feedback, okay, someone says no, someone says yes, let's hope it's okay. So we have today, or this week, I should rather say. I'm hearing myself at least. But who is making the feedback sound? This, okay, somebody's making feedback sound, it's not me. Is it you? No, I'm not the height. I thought you came from a height taller room. Yeah. I'm not the height. I'm not the height. Wait. Okay, that one, right? That one, right? So you're going to be in the picture. It's always in the picture, wait. Okay, now. Still? Yeah. I'm dead. Yeah, all the sound is coming back. Why isn't anyone focusing on me? I don't know. At least someone is focusing. I've got a new experience, I'm sure. When you closed the door, you pressed the L and R button. You pressed the L button. You pressed the L button. Now? Okay, new test. Let's see if it works. Start. But yeah, it works. So, a bit of interesting sound stuff going on today, as usual. Let's get started. So today, we are now beginning of week six. And we're supposed to do image segmentation, which we had a little look at last week and what it means. So now we get into all the details of it. And today, oh well, no. Yeah, today it's me and then tomorrow I'm away. So it will be guest lecture by Thalia, who is there for the first, the very first lecture. So he will take it away for tomorrow. And he will probably also be back in, yeah, towards more the end of the course. But that should be fine. He's very good at lecturing. So then for this week, two chapters to read, both kind of short-ish. That's segmentation and then object detection. And then we have some nice notebooks for you to test out on this. So first of them are like following the book and then the rest is a bit more of an exercise. And I see now immediately that I forgot to update the title. The title says the title of last week. It was supposed to be, of course, Lecture 7 and image segmentation for this lecture today.

## Computer vision tasks (8:18)

But we can get straight to it and look at different computer vision tasks. So this you will find in the book as well. And we have been doing the multiclass classification a bit like this. So if this is your picture, then the task is kind of select one of, in this case, three possible classes. And I can only select these because I trained on only, okay, at least for this example, I trained on only these three. So these are my only options. And no matter what the picture actually contains, I would have to predict one of these three. So doing multiclass classification, multiclass because there's more than two of them. But still, it's only the one output, right? One of these three. So we call it then a single label multiclass classification to be super technical about the wording. This is kind of okay. We see people biking, so we should predict biking for this one. But then there are different things we can do, as we can also imagine. So say I have trained on presence of different things like person, boat, street, car, whatnot. And then I have what you call multi-label output. So I can predict not exclusively one, but I can predict all of them that I see. So different ways to achieve this. And I can say, okay, see in this case, bike, person, tree. So I'm going to say or classify all of those while I didn't find any of these other ones, car, house, boat. So I will not predict these. But now I'm not exclusively predicting one thing anymore. So I have to do something different. So I have my softmax activation function towards the end, which ensured that I have 100% probability of one of them in total. I have to drop and then do things a little differently. But then so multi-label is different than multiclass. So multiclass just means many possible classes. Multi-label means I do assign many potentially labels to one data point or one image in this case. So this we can do and sort of just use the models that we had from last week to do this. But now then we want to get into a different type of computer vision task, which is quite important actually. For today, it will be image segmentation, which is the business of selecting each pixel that belongs to a certain class. So here I have bikes and I select these bike containing pixels by red and one person in blue and so on. And that is one thing we can do. It gets you a very fine contour around each of the classes. But maybe you are satisfied with kind of just having boxes that localize your classes in the image. This is kind of the most common thing to do if you're doing this type of task, which we call object detection. So you just want to identify each object and then make a box that says, OK, within this box, more or less, I found my objects. And then there are different things I can do with this. So I can say that, OK, I want to do some kind of monitoring. So I want to count how many people I have in the image at any given point in time. And then in this case, I have two because I found two different separate bounding boxes for this person. And I found two bikes and I found two street lamps and so on. So very common thing to do, well, actually, both of these. And we'll get into some examples to show this later. But then first, let's do a bit of definitions. So basically, I said it already. I forgot to have one more example, but that's a bit of a teaser. So maybe anyone can identify this video. It gets a bit choppy on Zoom, but for us in the room, you can see it. So this is basically what the Tesla autopilot system sees when it's driving around on. Yeah, when it's doing autonomous driving, as it's called, when it's driving itself. You can see that it has to find a lot of different stuff like, well, other cars, of course. We see these bounding boxes on different cars. We see that it identifies road signs, gives some prediction of where it's about to drive and all these sort of things. Seeing also pedestrians and markers on the road and so on. This is kind of one very typical use case for object detection. Or basically all sorts of computer vision tasks are being put into one for this case. Yeah, so the question was, which kind of model is used? And it's a lot of different models. We have kind of these straight up object detection models that detect things. And then there is a reinforcement learning model that operates on the basis of these things being detected. So we kind of have a chain of different models being used. But the driving bit itself is reinforcement learning, yes. But these are, of course, business secrets. So we don't really know that much about how it really works. But we know that definitely it combines this object detection bit with reinforcement learning. So yes, good question. So at least the reinforcement learning bit is a bit beyond us in this course. But all the object detection stuff we can absolutely do on this kind of front task. Because we'll get into, yeah, at least, well, not by me, at least. So I think no. But it's, well, to be fair, it's a very difficult type of thing, definitely. So reinforcement learning is kind of among the most frustrating things you can do. Because it's so hard to really get it to work. So I think, yeah, at HVL, and I think maybe also even at UAB, there is no course for this. Ah, they do have one. Yep, very cool. Okay, so UAB has a course on this. We don't, as far as I know, at least. The option, at least, when you get into the master program, that you can take courses at UAB and learn these things. Okay, so very cool. Yeah, that would be not too much overlap with us and reinforcement learning, but a lot of overlap with us and the kind of bits that go into making this work, which is, well, recognizing and reading signposts, of course, and recognizing other cars and things in traffic in general.

## Image segmentation (16:18)

But that was maybe one example. So we're supposed to really do definitions. So there are different types of image segmentation you can do. So basically, it's based on the same thing. We split it in slightly in what you are supposed to do with your outputs. So one thing is called semantic segmentation, where, well, semantics being what does something mean or what is something. And that would be the first example so that I can say for sure that, well, this bunch of cats are all of type cats, while everything around, I can classify as backgrounds, for instance. But then I identify for each single pixel in this image, I identify, does it belong to class or instance cats or does it not belong to cats? Well, then the second thing, which might be more useful in many cases is to do so-called instance segmentation, that is to find each instance. So if there are multiple cats like this, then I'm able to distinguish them and I can put a so-called mask on top of each of the different cats and separate them as different instances. So still, background is background, but now I have cats, one, two, three, four, nicely separated in between them. And then, yeah, overlaid in this case, the prediction of my model. And then also, well, it's maybe not such a common word, but also in the book, so we can learn that still, which is the kind of combination that is called panoptic segmentation. So then you output different things or two different things, so you output kind of which category is it and which instance is it. So for each of these, you would have kind of label on tops as cats and then second labels as cat number two. So it's kind of just the combination of these. Then at least for the semantic and instance types, these are typically the ones we want to have. Then the kind of concept still stands, so for every single pixel of this image, I'm doing a prediction. So if I have, I don't know, 600 by 400 pixels, then I need to make a prediction for 600 by 400 number of different pixels. So my output should also be of this dimension. So I have to make a lot of predictions in a sense. And that gets us to building this thing. So this, yeah, once we have the definitions in place, we know we're supposed to do, then it's just a matter of doing it.

## Building a semantic segmentation model (19:00)

We have one trick that we need to learn for today. And that will get into pretty soon once we sort of understand what we're supposed to be outputting for this model. Then as for models, so step one, we need some training data. So we have images like cats, for instance, and then we have to know somehow the ground truth. Like where is the cat in this image? And then somebody has to annotate this and label it as different categories. And for the thing that will, or the task that we'll do in the notebooks, we have three different options of output labels. But there could be more, there could be less, could be like a yes no thing. But for this thing, we have a foreground, which means kind of the cat itself, the background, which is anything non-cats, but also we might want to be interesting in predicting the exact contour of this cat. Which you cannot get for free once you can separate one and two, but it can be nice also to introduce this as a separate task. Then, well, you can, of course, with different image pools, you can automate this task to some extent, but also many instances of training data are also manually annotated, as we call it, and then you get this thing. So in the purple, we have the foreground and everything else is background. And then this yellow thing is the outline or contour of the cats. And then you'll notice, okay, this is the true thing, this is what we want, this is the image that we're supposed to learn from. But both of these are essentially images, right? So now for visual effects in the book, we just give colors to these, but essentially it's just like category one, two, three, right? So it's a kind of a grayscale image that comes with label one, two, three. But still, it looks very much like an image, right? So we have just the differences that in the data itself, we have RGB, so we have three different color channels. But for this one, we just have one channel, which is the type of each pixel. But otherwise, it's still an image, right? We're going from image to image, in a sense, when we want to do this classification. So I want to take this image in, and I want to give this image out, essentially. And then we have to think a little bit. So we are used to, or what we did in the past now was to take an image and then give one type out, right? So we had to take the image and then kind of decompress it in a bit, or not decompress, but kind of compress the information a bit. And then end up with the patterns. And then when you have recognized this and that pattern, you can say, okay, this was a cat or this was a dog or this was kind of just one number of information in the end. But now, okay, our target has kind of the same number of pixels in width and height. So now we have to, in fact, predict an image, in a sense. And it should be the exact same dimension, because then I can take the mask and I can overlay it and I can say, well, this is the exact position where I found the cat. So we can start doing this, then try to think a little bit how this would work. So in terms of dimensions, then how should it be? So we have these shapes again, height, width, and the color channel for the image, as we're used to. This we have, right? And then we're also used to making some kind of internal representation that is supposed to represent our knowledge in the model. So it's supposed to be information about presence or non-presence of certain patterns that are useful for making the decision. And that can be, well, it can be any dimension, really. It's just up to us to construct something nice. This is where we do the decision, as usual. But then we have to end up then back at height with one color, essentially, which is our prediction. So we need some kind of model that does this. So maybe this thing, well, this we know quite well already going to this internal clever representation. And then we could do some down sampling and stuff. But now we have to get back again. And at this point, we can start thinking about two nice words that kind of pop up for many different types of models, which is like it seems a bit that we could call this process going from data to our internal representation. We can say that this is an encoding of sorts because we take data and then we kind of squeeze it down to something that is useful for us. So we encode it, we could say. But now then we're not we can't just do the encoding and then predict. We also have to decode our knowledge inside of the model somehow into making the output mask, as we call it. That basically shows where in the data we found our or made our decisions. So then encoding, decoding type of pattern. This will get back to a lot, but we can kind of reflect a bit already now on what we should think of this encoding, decoding pattern would work. But OK, but at least the encoding we have done a lot of times. So this we can we can try and do and set up a model like like so.

## Defining the model (25:21)

And then we have to take an input, as we know. So this now will be entirely in this we call it functional API. Right. It doesn't have to be, but we can just get used to it already. So in this particular case, everything is kind of sequential, but we're going to introduce a non sequential model pretty soon. So let's stick to this functional API. Then all starts with an input, right, as some kind of image size. We don't really need to know it yet. But we have an image size and we have three colors. So let's just define this as the input. And then as a bit of preprocessing, if we have an image that has pixel values from 0 to 55, typical 8 bits per pixel information, then it's nice for us to rescale it so that values are from 0 to 1. So this is then just about making making nice numbers for our model to work on. And in the end, it turns out everything is really about making nice numbers. But then we can get into the encoding business. And this we know already, right, these two dimensional convolutions, we have done a lot and they were nice because they could recognize patterns in a kind of hierarchy. So if I do three by three convolutions to begin with, I'm looking at super small parts of the image, but then I can do strides, for instance, and then kind of move a bit bigger steps. And we know that this will down sample in the end my number of pixels. So this is just directly from the book, so you can follow it also in the book. We do activations as we need to do in order to make it make any useful stuff out of this. And then in this particular example in the book, they have said padding equal to same. So if I had not been doing strides, I would get the same dimensions, but I am doing strides because I do want to down sample the size of this so that I can look at bigger and bigger and bigger patterns. And then you also noticed, OK, so we got used to this max pooling business, and I'm not using this now. Instead, I'm using these strides. Why is that? Well, that is something we can think about a little bit. And then if I hopefully remember towards the end, I can give you the solution to this. But at least if I'm doing these kind of strides, then I'm jumping by bigger steps. And in the end, I will down sample this. So I can do it many times, get better and better patterns. I can do more and more filters to give a super detailed pattern recognition mechanism of this. And in the end, I would have to do this Keras.model thing. And this is kind of this is encoding my information in a sense. But if I do the classic, if I write model.summary on this and I look at my shapes, I will notice that if I start with a 200 by 200 image, then as we have been doing last week and the week before that and so on, once I'm doing these convolution operations, I kind of off the size. Now it's 100 by 100 pixels. Keep going 50 by 50. And then I have 25 by 25 pixels by the time I'm done with all these convolutions. And that is, well, on one hand, it's exactly what I want because I want to look at bigger and bigger parts of the image so that I can recognize stuff no matter where in the image it is. But also I have a bit of a problem now because I said that we need the, we need the output to be the exact same dimensions as the inputs. But this is a bit tricky now because I had 200 by 200 and now I'm at 25 by 25. So it doesn't, obviously it doesn't match up. So my predictions at this point doing encoding only probably contains all the information that I need. But it's now super low resolution compared to the original image. And here comes the big trick of today to do the decoding step to go from my very nice but compact internal representation and back to something that looks like my original image.

## Transposed convolution (30:30)

And that is the thing called transposed convolution, which is sort of convolution in reverse, at least when you look at dimensions. So we had, okay, I didn't put the figure of the classic convolution, but you know, we had these kernels and we applied it to different spots. And for each place I put my kernel, then I would multiply and sum, so all that information ends up in one pixel. And now I kind of want to do the opposite. So now I want to have one pixel and then expand it into maybe four pixels instead. So I could just take the info and paste it for different places, but I could do something even more clever than that, which is this transposed convolution. So like the classic convolution, it has a kernel and this I learn, so I learn all these values. But then I just kind of do the opposite thing, right? So I take my input value, this pixel, it was zero. And then I multiply by each spot or each pixel in the kernel, but then I don't sum it, I just put this as each of the different four spots. So zero times zero, that is also zero. Zero times one is zero. And then I get these different spots and then I can move on. So now I go to one and then I do the same thing. So one times zero is zero, one times one is one, and so on. And then in the end I get something that is, so I go from two by two pixels and now I have three by three pixels. So I was able to upscale this thing, but in a clever way because I'm using a kernel that I learned from training data. So it learns how to do this in a good way rather than just kind of copy and pasting values. So we learn how to do the opposite of what we did in the encoding step. So this will then be our decoding. So it does kind of what we want, takes a small compressed image, so to say, moves it up something bigger and not by just pasting values, but rather doing something clever based on what we learned from training data. And this is always what we want, right? So we can have a look at this trick and of course read the book or also many YouTube videos on this. And then we can assemble the entire encoding decoding business by sticking in the exact same number of transpose convolutions as ordinary convolutions. So this I did six times. So then I do this transpose thing also six times, but then make sure I do the strides and kernel sizes and so on. So that it matches up. Then doing kind of compressing down and then decompressing up again. And then we remember in the end, we need to say, what is my final output? And that's going to be one of three classes, right? So we have cats, backgrounds and contour. And then we're not doing multi-label, we're just doing multi-class. So we can do the usual softmax output, right? And that's going to be one of the three. Or it can be any score, but it's going to sum up to one at least, which is important. And then keras.model, my inputs, my outputs, and I am good to go. So then we can look again. If I do this model.summary function again and look at my shapes, which is always nice, then we can see it's going to look like this. So input was 200 by 200. Then I did all my convolution stuff here. And then we can see how I'm now getting back. So I ended up where my most compressed part was 25 by 25 pixels, although with many channels. And now I'm doing 50 by 50 all of a sudden, doubling up 100. And then at the end, I have 200 by 200 pixels, exactly same as inputs. And I have three different outputs because I have these three different things I'm trying to predict, right? So foreground, background, contour. So then I have a model which satisfies kind of everything I want. It has same dimension outputs as inputs. It has kind of a compression bit, bottleneck you sometimes call it, where all my information learned is supposed to live, in a sense, in this abstract representation. And then I'm able to decompress it and expand all the my learned information onto the dimensions of the image itself. So this you will get to try in the notebooks for later today. And you will also try one more thing.

## Improved segmentation models: the U-Net (35:54)

So we have 10 minutes. It should be fine. So let's, towards the end now, look at, immediately look at some ways to improve this. So now it was kind of this sequential thing. Conv, conv, conv, conv, conv, and then transpose, transpose, transpose. But we already learned some tricks, right? So maybe we just get to some of these fancy tricks right away. And that is the so-called U-net for reasons that will become obvious pretty soon. But I told you that, so if you want to have many layers, more than 60 and 70 and 20-ish layers, then it's going to be difficult to learn because of vanishing gradients and all this numerical stuff. And we learned that residual connections was the way to solve this. So just adding in connections, kind of skipping between the different convolution blocks. And that was super helpful because if you have vanishing gradients in one block, then you can still propagate the information past it and still learn. So why don't we do this immediately now on this segmentation network? And then you can drop it up in a nice shape that looks a bit like a U. So that's why people call it the U-net. And this is a very common type of segmentation model that was in fact first developed for, not kind of for general images themselves, but rather for medical diagnosis. So looking at x-rays, for instance, and finding tumors and stuff. We'll get, I'll show quickly some examples after. But this is how it looks. So you start with some image input with some dimensions, and then we're going to have same image out dimensions, which is nice. But instead of just doing the sequential thing, we do the compression steps or encoding steps down to here. But then these residual connections kind of go between the encoding and decoding steps. So every time I go down in resolution, I kind of copy and paste the same information into the decoding step. So I have these arrows going even just from directly from the input to the output. I have one arrow where I add in information, but all between these different ones so that they support the most efficient learning that we can do for this thing. So I made a notebook for you to test this as well so that you can get your hands dirty on residual connections for these things. And this, now you've seen it, this is the unit, and then the rest is for you to try in notebooks. But you can say that this is a super common thing to use. There are lots of different use cases. But as I was saying, this came from the medical field, in fact, so there's really a lot of medical uses for this. And you can, of course, improve on the architecture with different things as well. But as long as you kind of keep this U-shaped thingy, we still call it some unit derivative. And what can you do? Well, cell tracking is one thing. So very often you have different types of cells in a sample and you want to know which are different ones.

## Net use cases (39:21)

So a very typical thing. So here I want to segment. I want to do this instance segmentation, right? I want to find each separate cell and then these are different, highlighted by different color for each different cell. And you can see, well, some of them are obviously different. And maybe I want to do something special treatments to these that I identify as different. So these are kind of all biology and medicine inspired cases that we look at first, but are also different cases. But this one is CT scans of something. I forgot, lungs or something. In any case, you can segment by different things. So this segmentation map, as we call it, corresponds to something in medicine. I have no idea what these corresponds to other things. And these are very useful, of course, for a doctor or radiologist. So radiologists just get this map immediately and say, OK, these are relevant parts of the image. So this can do brain scans, lesions and bleeding in the brain and this nasty stuff we don't want to be exposed to. You can also do this very efficiently in CT and MRI and all different kind of medical diagnosis tools. So super popular use case and it works really well. You can also do other things like this thing is, you know, this farming robots that drive around a field and then have a camera. They can also do different types of segmentation so you can check for diseases on leaves. Kind of popular thing or checks for weeds in amongst your plants and so on. And then you can also, well, some of these lasers, some of these robots have these cool laser tools, right? So whenever they detect weeds, they kind of shoot the laser at it and kill it. Yeah, it gets kind of fun. And then also, of course, the self-driving cars can also do, well, not only these bounding boxes, but also if you like to do a very precise segmentation, which you need especially for, for instance, tracking the roads itself. So you have to, of course, find road markers on the road itself quite precisely. So that is one case where you would need to do some kind of segmentation based on probably a unit or the like. Then that's so second final slide for today.

## State-of-the-art image segmentation (42:12)

Let's look at the kind of more state of the art stuff. So we're skimming through things quite, quite fast in a sense. The state of the art is now doing segmentation of training images where you have several hundreds of these different annotated positions, the masks, as we call it. So for the typical cases, you have maybe like 10. But if you go to several hundreds, you can do this interesting stuff of really doing instance segmentation of hundreds of different things for each image. So it gets computationally a bit heavy, as you will see when you run the notebooks, but also super cool. So you can really detect super precise things. And the most, maybe most impressive model now is called segment anything, which comes from Meta research, old Facebook research. And we can have a little look at the demo for this.

## Segment Anything 2 Demo (43:21)

I think I showed you in the first lecture even, but this works now very well on video and it works also by prompting so I can click stuff. And then you can also have a lot of fun with this. If you go to the demo on the slides, some tutorials, okay. And then let's just see how nicely it works now. So this is a video, so we can do video tracking to track one object. And it does this by prompting, so I have to select what I want to track. So the obvious thing is to select this football and say, okay, let's go and track this. And then the video will be able to track the exact same objects all the time. And I can do this for loads of stuff. So, okay, let's in the final minutes have a little fun with the game. And maybe I do also, I don't know, shirts. And now it still works quite impressively, right? I get the segmentation map, I get the contours, and it's able to track these individual instances with pretty remarkable precision. It runs a little bit slower, so this runs in the browser, so it runs a little bit slower each time I click something. Let's try even a few more things maybe. No, in this demo you can track three. Okay. But you can download the model yourself and track thousands of things if you have the processing power to it. So still pretty cool. Ah, wait, there's more. Okay, how about this? How about this? Okay, if I click into some effects, that's very cool. How about, skip this. Let's make, okay, now I'm just goofing around, okay, but we'll see. What does it do? Ah, okay, super cool. Well, lots of fun to be had with this, but it does have real use cases as well, right? As we saw for the self-driving car or other things. So I think that was my final slide, and then we are on time by one minute. So let's end for today and then do object detection, which she was drawing these bounding boxes tomorrow, and that will be by Thalia since I'm away, but otherwise business as usual. See you at the lab.
