# object detection
I can try. Maybe if I mute the room somehow? Okay, what about now? Okay, so I guess we'll just go with this. Sorry for the delay. So, the echo was still there, right? Are you able to endure this or is it really annoying? Yeah, it's pretty annoying. Yeah, could you? Sorry, I tried yesterday and it kind of worked, but no. I don't know what I'm doing, but at least two minds are better than one, right? Maybe we should mute over there? Yeah, because you've been looking at everything we're doing. Mute like that, in the zoom. Just take a mirror. Are you connecting to the zoom and not seeing this unit? No, I'm just connecting to it. Is this another zoom call? No, it's the same. You have a connector to the room. Yeah, it just goes all the way down. Now there is no echo. Have they heard you on zoom now? Okay, can anyone hear me on zoom now? Okay, the king. Okay, so just this one here. Thank you very much. Okay, good. Right, so after a couple of minutes of technicalities we can actually start. So I'll just start sharing the screen. Okay, now things should be opening. Okay, so welcome to today's lecture. Stefan is away today, so I'll be taking over. So this lecture we'll be talking about object detection. We'll go through a bit of what this field is about and how it's really a subfield of computer vision and like what kind of techniques you use there and how you actually do this stuff in practice. So as I said, it's a subfield of computer vision. What we're really trying to do when we do object detection is that we have say an image or video and what we want to do is essentially find all the objects in the image or the video and then kind of see either what they are classified of as the kind of standard image classification task or then kind of track how they move in a video. So these are essentially the two things where you want to do with object detection. For more kind of complicated tasks you can do image segmentation or anything. But yeah, I'll give you some examples. So this is just from the book and this is essentially counting.

## Counting (14:54)

You have an image of some things and you want to essentially know what these things are and where they are and then you should be able to label them. So this of course depends on the task you're trying to do. If your classes consist of say people, horses and ties, a good object detection should be able to return something like this. So it returns a box around the outline of the object and then it gives it a label kind of what it is. This is a still image from a video in which you can see you have some ants here which are moving up the tree. And you can also see some lions which are kind of following the ants. And this is kind of the tracking component of object detection. So for each frame in the video you can find the center of mass of the object and then you can kind of trace how it moves throughout the video. And of course this also applies to kind of the generic example here of say a CCTV footage in which you have some people moving in some crowded area.

## Tracking (16:00)

And what you do in real time then is kind of locate all the people and then kind of see how they move. So these are a couple of different models. You have the original video and then you have some resonant architecture, some other resonant architecture and then some YOLO models which stands for YOLO Look Once. But if you're able to see here these things aren't necessarily perfect. For example if you go over here you can see something labeled as a frisbee or something. There are some other essentially these things aren't usually perfect but they're fast. That's kind of the thing they're trying to do. And it's kind of difficult right if you want to track to say you have a video which is like 60 frames per second and you try to for each single frame you try to find all the objects and then classify them correctly. This is kind of a challenging task. So what is object detection all about?

## Object detection is all about the bounding box (17:12)

Well it's really creating these boxes around objects. And these things are called bounding boxes because they kind of contain the whole object you're trying to locate either in an image or a video. I will be talking about images here because I mean a video is just a sequence of images. So if you can do it for an image you can do it for a video just with one more index. So we define this bounding box as the kind of maximum extent of a two-dimensional object because I mean we're working with images and these are two-dimensional but I mean you can do this in three dimensions if you want. So if we actually have some I mean to specify the coordinates of a box in two dimensions you need four numbers. You need kind of the starting location in X and Y and that's kind of what you need. And kind of alternatively you can I mean it doesn't really matter what you do but you can also pick out the center of the image and that kind of give its width and its height. This will also give you a kind of bounding box. So when you have an image like this you just need to know this number, this number, this number and this number and then you're able to kind of trace out the box which outlines the object you're looking at. So essentially in object detection these are the four numbers you're trying to predict at each frame. There can of course be several objects in a single image so your task is essentially to get the set of four numbers for every single object in the image. And then the question is yesterday you probably heard about pixel level kind of image segmentation where in an image you classify every single pixel to a given label either like a background object or kind of boundary or some class for example. And we could actually use this for object detection. Of course if you know what every single pixel in an image is you know what's in the image then you can draw a box around whatever object you're interested in. But this is very slow. The thing is also say you want to make some training data for this stuff right? Would you rather draw a rectangle around a person or would you kind of trace the outline contour of this person very very carefully? So if you want to label a data set with say one million of these things here I would much rather prefer to draw like if you just like do this then you have to do this but if you kind of need to do pixel level segmentation around a person that's much more costly. So first of all it's pixel level segmentation is great if you have the time for it but it's slow and it's kind of expensive to make a proper data set out of. So then we can ask well how does actually object detection work in practice?

## So how does object detection work in practice? (20:24)

Well there are two methods to this or two approaches and these are called two stage object detection and then single stage object detection. I will go through both of this but mainly focusing on the latter. So in two stage object detection you essentially have two things.

## Two-stage object detection (20:45)

You have a region proposal algorithm and a convolutional neural network and it works something like this right? You have an image and in the first stage you propose a bunch of regions. So these are essentially proposed bounding boxes around a bunch of, it kind of depends on how this stuff works. Either you can kind of hard code it to select look at different shapes or you can have some basic machine learning model which tries to figure out some kind of box there. And then for each of these boxes you pass it through a convolutional neural network which will then try to classify each of these regions into some class depends on your task right? So in step one you select around a thousand regions or there could be more several thousands. So you select really a huge amount of regions and the reason you have to do this is because like a priori you don't know what you're looking for you just have to test a bunch of stuff. So step one in this algorithm is kind of very naive it's not a very clever thing. And then for each of these regions you just pass them through a convolutional neural network which will then try to classify each of these objects into some class. I mean I guess you can already see some problems with this especially if you're trying to do this in real time. And that is simply because you have to pass thousands of kind of sub images into a convolutional neural network so you have to pass it through the whole network which is usually quite large. It has millions or billions of parameters. And also images typically don't have a thousand objects in them right? When we do object detection we're usually trying to pick out some people or some dogs or some cars or something like that. And it's very contrived to have like an image with a thousand different objects. You don't really have this, this isn't a real thing unless you're trying to classify each pixel or something. So what we do here is we essentially just discard every single proposed region which doesn't have really anything in it. And we do this by just like looking at the prediction and if there's no kind of peak towards any particular class we just discard it. And what I mean by this is if you have an example like this right? In which you have used an object detection algorithm to try to classify cars, signs and people. You can see there's a bunch of cars here, you have a bunch of signs and you have a couple of persons. But the usual region proposal will give you something like this red box here. It only contains, well it contains some asphalt and some lines but it's not really anything there. And you can imagine like if you have thousands of these boxes randomly placed around this image, most of them just doesn't contain anything. And you need to of course then pass all of these things through a convolutional neural network and that's expensive. And that is only in images, try to do this for real time object detection. In which say you have a self driving car or something like this, it just doesn't work, it's too slow. And really at this point you might as well just use pixel level detection which classifies each pixel in the image correctly or hopefully correctly. So what we do instead in object detection is so called single stage object detection. What this does is it tries to predict essentially everything at the same time. So you don't have this first step where you just propose a bunch of different boxes you want to classify in the second step. You just try to predict bounding boxes and labels at the same time. And that's the idea. So you kind of try to learn both bounding boxes and labels simultaneously. So of course this will be much faster because you only need one call to a convolutional neural network each time. But it's also much more efficient because I mean there's not thousands of objects in a regular image. But of course your accuracy will usually be slightly worse because you're trying to do a bunch of stuff at the same time. But if you want kind of real time applications you have to do this straight off. So done again like imagine self driving cars with thousands of calls to a convolutional neural network each single frame.

## Several single-stage object detectors exist (26:03)

So there are several of these things. I will only go through one of them. So in the book he goes through this retina net briefly. I would suggest you try to do this as well. You have something called single shot multi-box detectors which I won't be talking about. And then you have what we call the only look once kind of models which are abbreviated as YOLO. Because computer scientists are my age or younger sometimes. So I would suggest if you're kind of interested in reading actual scientific literature try to read the original paper. This is kind of short. It's not a hard read at all. And it's only like five pages of like actual material. So especially if you're interested in the object detection part say of a project later on I would suggest you just read this and see what's going on. But what I will try to do is essentially go through the details of this paper here. I kind of show you how exactly these YOLO models work just from training data to a final classification of an image or a video. Well before we actually look at the model architecture it's nice to know what our training data actually looks like.

## How does training data look like? (27:21)

Because I mean no model is better than what it trains on. The training data you will work with in object detection usually looks something like this right. You have several images and they have several things in them. So you're kind of ground through to your targets or images in which you have bounding boxes imposed on the objects in the image. And these will then have different labels depending on what you're looking at. So for example here you just have some simple cases in which you have images and then like a single clause in each image. So you have cows here, chairs, cats, cars and buses. These are kind of the usual things you try to find in object detection. Of course you can do this as complicated as you want to. But if you want like a data set which actually is labeled you are kind of confined to your usual things right. These huge data sets you're working with which are labeled they don't really contain very specialized objects such as stars or whatever. They contain like common things you would see in daily life. So this first kind of label data set is from a data set called Pascal. While this second one here is from the common objects in context data set which is abbreviated as COCO. You might have worked with this before but especially for this week if you follow the book and also if you want to do some of the exercises you will be working with this data set. So here I just went to the COCO data set. I mean you can just filter by the obvious ones or filter by some cats and bananas and you get a bunch of images which contain precisely this. But you might ask right this is maybe a bit too much information for object detection because this is pixel level segmentation. Each pixel in this image is classified as in class. This is not actually what we want but even though they appear as this you can just simply retrieve the bounding box coordinates as just using a dictionary. I will show you briefly how that's done. So if we take the common objects in context data set for clarity. It's a bunch of images with a bunch of things in it and each image is accompanied by a dictionary which means you get a bunch of information for each image. So for example if you download this data set which the book does and if you follow the book chapter 12 you will do this. So it downloads a bunch of images and each of these have you can see for example this particular image has three objects in it. So what you get essentially is the box coordinates here. So this is either the sample coordinates the height and weight or it's the minimum X and Y and minimum X and Y. And you also get some labels right. So this means essentially the first object in the image is label 17 and its account. So you get these coordinates. And the second one here that's a bench and the third one is the bicycle. So I've got to get this very nice label data set. The only thing you cut which is a bit more difficult than usual image classification is that you have to work with more information right. You have a bunch of coordinates not just a single label for whatever the image is.

## How does the original YOLO model work? (31:30)

So now I want to talk about how well how does these models actually work. How do they look like and how are they trained. So it follows a series of gradually more complicated steps. So first is the kind of trivial stuff. You just rescale everything to the same size. In this particular paper they use this resolution but I mean you can do what you want. And then you pass each image through a convolutional neural network and then this will result in some output tensor. I will go into the details on the shape of this tensor briefly. And then you need to apply some kind of thresholding to get your final predictions. I will also go over this later. This is essentially the pipeline of it. But it sounds rather easy but there are some technicalities to this of course. So this is probably the most important slide by far. And it outlines what kind of single stage object detection methods actually try to do. So you have an example image here right. So this is just whatever. Here we have like a person and a dog. And we try to do two things at the same time really. So if we look at the top here we're trying to predict the bunch of bounding boxes. Which you kind of contain each single object in the image. But we also want a measure of how well the model thinks there is an image or an object in that particular box right. So if we propose a box over here which doesn't contain anything. We want the model that's able to say there is no object there. Otherwise I mean your model doesn't work particularly well. And they should try to do this. I mean it has to do this for every single box it proposes. And then throughout learning it should then be able to design better and better boxes. Which should then try to find the actual objects in the image. And then for each box right you need to predict four numbers. Which is the coordinates of the box. And then you also need to predict the fifth number which is the model's confidence that there is an object inside the box. So that's the first part. That's five numbers you need to predict. And secondly you want to assign each single cell in this image into a prediction right. So I forgot to say but how you actually do object construction is you have your original image. You have to split it into multiple smaller parts because then objects aren't usually the entire image. So it makes sense to have a partition problem in smaller chunks. So here this is just a seven by seven grid. And you do this procedure for every single cell in your image. So the boxes you are going to assign several. You initialize them in one or two or three in each single cell of the image. But you also need to predict what's actually inside each of the cells. These are a bit disjoint because each box can extend past its cell boundaries. So you can see for example these body boxes here they can go outside the cells. But the cells themselves they are described by a single label which is kind of your ground truth of what's actually inside that cell. So for this example here your class map would look like blue here for the person and red here for the dog. And in the end you want to combine this information into a single output. So the dimensions there get a bit more tricky than usual because there's a lot of stuff you're trying to predict at the same time. But essentially for each cell you try to predict one or two or you can try to predict as many boxes as you want. This is a hyperparameter essentially. But for each cell you predict a bunch of box coordinates. You predict a confidence so that is the kind of line here. That's the coordinates plus the confidence. And you need to multiply that by how many boxes you try to predict. And then you also need your class prediction which is cell-wise. So say you predict this as a dog. This is the dog label and it can be contained in like however many classes you have depends on your task. I think in the paper they had 20 different classes but in another data set this could be 50, 100, 1000 something like this. So essentially the output tensors you're predicting is an S by S object which is like because there's S by S cells in this image. And then you need to predict 5 times B which is 5 times the number of bounding boxes plus the number of classes. So this is the shape of the output tensor. Does that make sense? I might have rambled a bit there but it's not as simple as just trying to predict a single class for a whole image. So conceptually it's a bit harder than image classification but if you understand this you kind of understand how object detection works. This is kind of your problem. So I mentioned this confidence which is how well your model thinks this has captured an object inside a proposed box.

## Some notes on the confidence score (37:51)

But we need to define this. It's called confidence and it should reflect as I said the confidence of your model that whatever box it proposes contains an object. But it should also kind of tell you how well the predicted box matches the kind of ground truth. This can be offset slightly. You don't need to contain the whole object at the same time you can miss it slightly. And this should be reflected in the confidence. So how we do this is to define the confidence as the probability that there is an object and that times the so-called intersection over union. Which is just a ratio of the area of overlap to the area of union. It's actually quite simple because if you have your two objects here in this box here a generic prediction will miss it slightly or to a large extent in this case. And the overlap is just like the pixels they both share while the union is just the total area of these two boxes. Of course if this thing is one then you have a very good box. The actual predicted box contains the whole image or the whole object. Whereas if you miss it then your confidence is zero just by default. So in a way this confidence then both detects the thing and is able to kind of localize it within the image.

## Network architecture (39:57)

So that was some kind of overarching problem what we're trying to solve. So let's have a look at how we actually do this. This is the network architecture used in the original Neural model from like 2015 or something like that. I mean more modern versions will have more modern stuff or more complicated things inside the neural network. But this is essentially just a convolutional neural network. I mean there's nothing fancy about it. I wouldn't necessarily read all the small numbers here. They're just specifying what kind of the shapes of the different convolutional layers are. But in essence it's just a 24 layered convolutional neural network standard practice. And then you have at the end of the convolutional layers you place two of these fully connected dense layers or multi-layer perceptrons. You just impose some Rayleigh activations. This you'll use the Rayleigh but this is just a choice. In essence these object detection networks are just convolutional neural networks. There's nothing fancy about it. There's no transformers or anything like that. So I said 20 out of 24 in a bit of a weird fashion there. And that's because in the spirit of pre-training or using backbones you usually take the bulk of the network and pre-train it on some generic image classification task. So what they did is take the 21st layers of the convolutional neural network and train it on image classification from this ImageNet dataset with a thousand different classes. And then after you've trained your 20 or say 80% first of the network you then fine-tune it by adding a couple of more convolutional layers and a couple of these fully connected layers. And then you fine-tune it on your dataset you're interested in it. So at the time this was a so-called Pascal dataset while more modern ones will use this common objects in context dataset. The one who's used fine-tuning and I think essentially every YOLO model uses pre-training. But another approach which you will do if you follow the exercises is to just load a backbone of a trained ResNet or an exception model. So these are widely available. For the purposes of you not having infinite GPU access this is much better because you're just loading a pre-trained model. You don't have to retrain it. This takes forever if you have say 50 layers of a ResNet. This takes a long time. This is quite simple really because Chaos has a lot of this implemented. You can just load them and they're kind of ready to work. You just need to rescale your images so they match your target images.

## Choosing a suitable loss (43:24)

So that's kind of coming back to the problem and how we actually set up a suitable loss for this task. So recall we have three things we want to predict. So first of all we need to classify things. Second of all we need to place boxes around all objects in the image. And thirdly we need to specify a number which is the model's prediction of how confident it is that a box contains an actual object. So there are three parts to this. I don't have way too many slides left so I think I'll just go until I'm done and then we have an early lunch by the way. So the classification part of the problem. This is just categorical cross entropy. Nothing new here. For the box placement you can kind of do whatever you want. A common choice here is to use the sum of squared arrows of the box coordinates. What I mean by this is you have a set of true bounding box coordinates. These are four numbers. And then you try to predict these four numbers. And that's what kind of set I's here with a half. That's your predictor coordinates. So if you simply take the difference between them and square, that's a good choice for a loss function. Because if your coordinates are way off, this will be a very large number. So it's very similar to the mean squared arrow. So for the last part we need to then define a loss which kind of encapsulates the bounding box confidence. This is a bit more tricky but not too bad. So the confidence is defined as the probability of you having an object times the actual intersection over union between your prediction and the ground truth. So in words this is simply is there an object there in my box? And then how well does my predictor box match the ground truth box? This is what this confidence really means. So if there is no object there, I mean this is zero. If it's not there, it's zero. There's your multiple of zero confidence because I mean the probability of an object being there, if it's not there, it's zero. And if you have an object in the box, you just have that confidence to the intersection over union. Because I mean the probability that you have an object given you have an object is one. So it's actually just this intersection over union between your predicted box and your ground truth. And if you do it like this, your confidence is a learned measure. Because at the start of your training it will be really bad but after a while it should be good.

## Putting it all together (46:45)

So how do we actually put this all together? Well, we just define a loss which is a sum of all of these components. So the first part here is the so called, this is the coordinate loss and this refers to all your bounding boxes and their coordinates. The second one is your confidence. That's just the difference between the target confidence and the predicted confidence. Square it, sum it, all good. And then the last part is the standard classification loss which is your cross entropy. And I mean that's it really. But there are some comments. So these sums go over all cells in the image, right? Because you split your image into an S by S grid. And for each single cell you have a bunch of bounding boxes. I mean the example which is in the book uses just sets this B to 1 so it's slightly easier but you can have as many as you want. Also, your classification loss, you only really apply it if there is an actual object inside the cell. Of course, you can do what you want with a loss. This is machine learning, we do precisely what we want. We can just scale these components by some numbers depending on what's kind of the most challenging thing for you to be able to predict. This depends a bit on your data set. The authors of the paper, they scaled the coordinates loss by a factor of 5 I think because they found that this part of the loss was more challenging and thus we had to improve it. But these are hyperparameters. So box placement is kind of the most important thing.

## Overlapping bounding boxes (48:33)

So I mean that's essentially it. I mean this is what you do in object detection. You have an image, you have a bunch of things and you try to predict boxes around each different thing. By choosing this following loss you kind of get the model which does all of this at the same time. But there is a slight complication, it's not really challenging but it's worth speaking about. So if you have an object here, which is a cat, you will generally have multiple bounding boxes which targets the same object. So for example, if you look at this red bounding box, this is the best because it contains more or less the whole cat. Whereas this green and this blue one are like decent, they contain like parts of the cat but not whole. So say your learned confidences for these different colors are like 0.9, 0.7 and 0.35. You want a model which says that this is a single cat, there's not three of them. But this is actually quite simple because if there is a bunch of overlap between these three bounding boxes, you just remove the ones with the lowest confidence and you retain the largest one. So this is some logic you have to apply after you train the model when you kind of get to the prediction stage. But it's essentially just removing the lowest confidence learned boxes. If there are two cats, one lanes upon the other, and the other two overlapping, what happens then? These things are usually challenging for object detection algorithms. Some of them can handle it, some of them can't. It depends on how you set the threshold really, on like how this should be discarded. So this is a kind of free parameter. You can set it to whatever you like. So I think you just need to fine tune this parameter in a sense to kind of find what works well in practice. But that's a very nice question actually, because these models are usually a bit limited in what you can actually predict. If you have a bunch of things at the same time, or in a very close proximity of each other, you're not necessarily going to be able to classify these things. So if you have like, say, seven birds in the top cell of this image, you wouldn't be able to distinguish all of them. So in that case, you would need to increase your cell size, but this then makes the problem more challenging, because there's more things you have to do. Yeah, that's more or less it. Object detection isn't really all too... I mean, the chapter isn't very long itself.

## Machine learning is learn by doing (51:48)

This is essentially a subfield of computer vision. If you know computer vision or like convolutional neural networks, object detection is really just about specifying that you want to solve a bunch of things at the same time. You just use the same tools. So I would highly suggest you follow the example in the book in which you kind of do these steps. You load your common objects in context data set. You try to work with it a bit, and then you try to set up a model like this. Ideally using some backbone, because otherwise you'll be stuck in training for like five days. It takes some time to explore this data set, because if you looked at the project catalog, you might have seen this task, which is post estimation, in which you're trying to figure out what kind of post a human is doing. And this relies on this, especially this cocoa data set here. It is by far the best and largest and most complete data set we have of like objects and image segmentation tasks. So if you looked at this, I highly recommend you just check out this data set.

## Summary (53:12)

So that brings me to a summary, quite fast. Hopefully not too fast. But object detection is really all about trying to predict boxes around objects in images, and by extension videos, because that's just a sequence of images. You usually want to do this in real time, otherwise you could just use pixel-level segmentation, which is just better. But you really want some kind of speed to this, otherwise you cannot apply it to a self-driving car or some CCTV footage, which is live. For this reason, we use these single-stage detectors, which try to predict everything at once. And that is your box around each object in the image, what the label of that box is, or like what's inside. And then also a confidence score, which is your model's ability to recognize that there is an object in the image. Apart from us needing to specify a custom loss function, because these things wouldn't be present. You cannot load a Keras loss, say object detection loss, something like this, it doesn't exist. You have to create it yourself. Apart from that, single-stage object detection algorithms are usually just convolutional neural networks. So if you know them from prior, as you should, it's not too difficult. In a more standard, modern fashion, the bulk of these networks are either pre-trained or using backbones, in which the pre-training or backbone part has to learn some general high-level features from generic image classification tasks. So such an image net is very popular for this. It's a huge dataset of just stuff with image classification. That's it, actually. We're done early. Do you have any more questions for this? Or feel free to come up and ask me afterwards. I guess not. Okay, that's a question. Yeah, that's it. Yeah, that's it. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay.
