# computer vision and the concepts of layers

## Deep learning engineering (0:03)

Image classification using convolutional neural networks.

## Shallow learning (10:12)

But then first we also last week sort of defined deep learning so one thing you can do is shallow learning right some you have some features and then they go directly to your model and then you make some prediction. So yeah lost all with it a lot of different types of models that do this and then we also realized from the example on the previous slide that I can also make some features myself I can sit down and kind of manually write up some stuff that makes. Or just some transformation that makes it easier for me to classify so I can put this into my model and then improve things. And if we want to write it up as a function my prediction why is going to be my model f which is some kind of mathematical function and then it takes in. Well the first feature on the next one and then also my engineered features and at the end some parameters and then I compute my prediction by. Yeah typically multiplying and adding numbers and maybe some if statements if I have a decision tree and so on. But then kind of all the features go into the model and then boom comes comes a prediction.

## Deep learning (11:39)

The gradient descent algorithm updates the weights based on the loss.

## The feed -forward neural network (15:57)

And now we are this thing for the demo right just a little bit of repetition how this looked. It was kind of a linear regression thing multiple linear regression but actually we introduced a activation function and then it's not linear anymore now we have the power and the flexibility to make any kind of funny looking function. So if data has a complicated distribution now we are able to make. Make a complicated function that separates between things in the case we want to do classification. So now we want to add some stuff in front of this so we still want to do this in the end because we want one output which is kind of okay let's say cat in the image yes or no. So we need to do this at least once but we want to add a lot of stuff in front of this which is actually transforming the picture into some representation that is that is useful for us. So that means new new layers so this was kind of the original one and we use it in all cases but. Usually only at the end as we'll see to make the final final prediction

## Image classification (17:21)

So then we go to the kind of our typical case the first big computer vision thing so imagine it's. Yeah it's 90 90 more or less. Can picture itself setting at home and listening to. Now what was the big thing in the night is written is very smart stuff so this is around the age right and this will also do in the first notebook and we have a task at hand which is we have some 10,000 handwritten images. No sorry handwritten digits images of these handwritten numbers and then we want to automatically translate into digital representation so we want to. Yeah whenever people send stuff in the mail for instance want to process it automatically want to just recognize these handwritten numbers and see what kind of numbers numbers they actually are and want to do it on a machine and we don't really want to sit and. Have all the manual work of reading it we just want to do kind of simple optical character recognition that's as it's called now OCR but for numbers. So we have this thing right and there's a couple pixels you can see it's not very high resolutions we see each pixel and as a great scale thing and then how do we go about to classify this as a number. So we have the numbers are zero to nine right to attend different options for what this could be and then we want to take each pixel and then somehow aggregate all this info and then gets decision number two out. Okay so what we learned was that we have this thing which take features in so the kind of first thing that you could do if you know about this type of layer is to say okay. X1 is pixel number one X2 is pixel number two and so on and these are values and it's zero if it's white and. Yeah I guess some number if it's black maybe it goes from zero to one for instance. So then okay if I do this approach so kind of very roughly says if I take this is pixel and this is pixel and this is pixel and so on just to kind of. Yeah show you how it more or less would be would be done without taking all the pixels we kind of imagine that's right okay so there's some kind of pattern going on for this number. Where there's a little bit of stuff in this circle a lot of stuff in this circle and then I kind of going on and I could do this for all the pixels of just make this circle smaller and I kind of see that okay this is the pixel representation of this number two. Okay kind of makes sense right so if there's some value in these pixels and all these pixels then this in total should mean that I have number two and if there are different pixels highlighted then it should be a different number. So this is kind of the immediate thing that we could do and then. Kind of see pretty quickly that doesn't always work that well so if I. Instead of centering my number two in the middle I may be have a little smaller number two and I put it down in the corner and then. Yeah I didn't really line up with these colored circles that had identified as my pattern. So we have two kind of immediate problems here so first. We said it's not invariant under translation just meaning if I move stuff around in the image then I get different results so now my number two is no longer where it was supposed to be but it's I can still see that this is a number two right but my. Simple neural network accounts. And then second thing also not invariant under what we call dilations or just changing the size it's a bit smaller now and then it didn't really fit up with what I kind of handcrafted at handcrafted as my as my pattern for this number two. So just one pixel is one input didn't really work that well. It was a nice idea but then I have to ensure that all my numbers do are in the middle and they look kind of the same and it doesn't really scale all that well. So this is something we have to solve before we can really move on in in computer vision. And what

## Enter the convolution operation (22:15)

It's a mathematical operator that takes two functions and produces a new function.

## an operation that takes in two functions and ret (22:36)

The gradient descent algorithm updates the weights based on the loss.

## Discrete convolution (24:57)

And then instead of these functions we actually have our image and then a second image that we will call a filter to play or kernel people can't really decide on the names so you'll see both of this. And then in for picture it looks something like like this so of course read the book afterwards in chapter eight is it to kind of get a feel for what it does. But let's try and try and look so I have more examples in the next slide but now let's look at kind of. This first upper corner so if I was saying so my first function was an image so you can see this as pixels right and I have some values and that's the pixel it intensity is what is called. So if it's zero there's nothing going on in this pixel but if it's a high number then you have something going on this kind of our. images work right and then I have my second function which I call the filter and then I want to do this but I said it's now easier because I just multiply and some. So always it's this multiplying and something so if I take that this thing kind of put it over there and then I'm supposed to multiply the numbers that are up. No sorry multiply the numbers that match the pixels and then add up and that again one number out and that's kind of the value for this spot. So okay yeah also try to visualize this on your own but I feel like so this pixel in my filter matches to this place right so I'm supposed to take minus one times three. So that's this thing and then I do the rest for all of the other positions and then I sum up and then turns out the final results minus three for this one. So this is what we do and then we stick the output values in the kind of center position of this and then we move to the next spot so it's going

## Convolution over images (27:15)

Test all possible locations did we see the pattern that are kind of filter so to say it's is looking for.

## The convolution kernel (or filter) (30:12)

So the thing is just to try to at some point involve machine learning. But before this we had kind of human learning so people made all kind of filters to do different stuff in image processing. Image processing and the nice thing with this is you kind of can just look at it and see to some extent what is doing. So if I have one thing which has. Yeah, high numbers on a vertical line then basically this is going to highlight vertical lines and diagonals and horizontal and so on. We can kind of see this in one of the examples in the book that if I have then my. Letter is now sorry numbers zero in this case and I apply a filter which looks for this. Yeah, left to right diagonal thing. Then the output is going to be get a high value where I have this kind of diagonal. So here for instance the diagonal goes the opposite direction so don't see much little bit but not that much. But this place I have the diagonal and I can see it and also in this place I can sort of recognize that this is where I saw this type of shape and my shape was super simple and. We can imagine that I may be one something more advanced and this will also get to actually keep making it simple turns out to be a nice thing. Even one more progression on this so if you're into photography probably seen a lot of filters already like if I have just one that highlights everything and takes an average in the end is just blurring things you

## More filters (32:03)

The gradient descent algorithm updates the weights based on the loss.

## Kernels for image recognition (33:21)

Okay so I'm going to remove any filler words from this transcript.

So back to these numbers different number this time let's look at what seems to be a number five. And then I want to make a filter that matches this thing and okay fine so I'm not not looking at the individual pixels now. As I was in the first network but I want to do convolution so I make a noise filter and then we kind of saw that okay filters if they look the same then they have a good match so let's make a filter that looks the same and then apply it. And then I solve so okay now my filter is the same size as image so it's not kind of room for me to drag it around but if I took this filter and then. Move it around outside of the image it would give nothing but once I hit number five it would give give. Yeah and my case computer it to 0.98 so pretty close to perfect match. So the translation thing I can solve. So turns out if I have this filter under convolution then it's very nice match so already I improved quite a bit. So now I can move my number around and will still be very good match but okay let's try to test it against other things so for this number anything maybe. Still a bit of a match but then okay yeah we sort of sort of accept this because these are similar looking things to some extent. So we can say that we get I put my threshold that's I don't know, 0.8 anything above is is a five. So it wasn't it wasn't perfect but it's kind of working working nicely. But then we have the one thing still. So if my take my number and I just write it a little bit smaller it's the exact same thing but it's a bit smaller now. Okay now it didn't really add up that well. So this translation thing of moving stuff around this was kind of easy with the convolution operation because I test all possible spaces for where the where the pattern could be. But once I start moving the sizes around a little bit it's not perfect anymore to have this one big filter

## Decomposition into simple patters (36:00)

So if I have these big ones they're supposed to capture the entire thing then I need more or less as many filters as I have images of this number and it's not really a very scalable approach. So what I can do and what we we want to do is to take rather just small filters. So three by three pixels is kind of just become the standard for how big a filter should be. Some cases maybe five by five pixels but still is usually very small. So three by three pixels is typically way too small for you to kind of actually recognize the the big image but it works because of what we'll see. So the question for everyone on zoom was this down scaling the image. Yeah matter the answer is yes we want to do this a lot. So you can have us already so let's first just look at what we get from this multiple small filters and then involve the the magic of. Yeah up and down scaling essentially. But if I now have we get say I have at least these three ones could be an example so I want to have some straight lines and I want to have some edges and a different direction edge. This is going to light up here and that's going to light up there and not not other places but we can at least highlight features of this number. And then we do this so we also learned that this will. When I apply it to all positions it will down scale things by yeah the size of my. Colonel filter. So I get a slightly lower resolution image, really kind of highlights where I saw some of these features. And this kind of makes conceptual sense does not so if I learn how to write the number five then what does it need well it needs a flat bit at the top and then it needs kind of bit going down and then it needs this 90 degree edge and then it needs kind of semi circle at the bottom. So the number five is kind of truly if you were to describe it is truly described by this at different small patterns. So actually identifying the small patterns is quite nice and then I see where did some of these patterns appear and then. So technically I get many of these for each pattern and then I can look at this again with a new pattern and so on and repeat. And it's going to be something like this so for a silly image taken from from the book. So it's all about decomposition in a sense. So if I have one kind of large scale pattern which is the face of a cat then well turns out it's actually composed of many of these smaller lines. So if I take all of these smaller lines, I kind of generic I can apply or assemble them into an eye or different ones assembly into nose different ones assembly into air and then kind of. If I assemble this again, if I have two eyes and a nose and an air to air, I mean then this is likely to be a cat's right. But then one magic thing that we also noticed from this diagram is that so. These lines that were kind of meant to identify an air. We're not the only ones that went into classifying this air actually was some different lines as well that went into this one. And that is kind of nice because now. So we dropped the idea of having one big mega filter that is supposed to recognize everything rather we just have small filters that identify very generic lines. But then turns out different compositions of very generic shapes or patterns they make bits of bigger pattern and that this again goes into the much or the kind of top level pattern that we're looking for in this case a cat. So turns out now this is actually quite efficient approach because now I have different filters they pick out different things. But these filters can be reused for different concepts. So these filters are both used to identify eyes and also identify ears. So actually have a kind of condensed type of way of representing shapes that again can put up into a hierarchy and then get the final thing. So this decomposition makes it very efficient for me. So if I have like the first layer has just some filters that identifies completely basic stuff then this can be composed into different things that. Give me the ability to get the to the end goal of this high level pattern which was composed of smaller things. And that's great so we got us this far now we also want to have a look

## Keras layers (41:36)

So I can actually let's. Before we discuss everything let's actually just have a quick look at. Web page itself for the library. So this web page I think you'll visit quite a lot.

## A superpower for ML developers (41:51)

Documentation has descriptions of all layers and examples show how to use them.

## Keras 3 API documentation (42:18)

layers is where this building blocks live and there are different ones.

## Keras (42:42)

The gradient descent algorithm updates the weights based on the loss.

## The Conv2D layer (45:27)

We can end hopefully two minutes early because after run to a meeting and then we pick everything this of this up again to tomorrow at 10 and then build our final final model. Or well you kind of get to test it already in in the lab today. But we saw in the documentation so there was a long list of arguments to this one turns out we actually just need the first first two really but there's. Yeah let's say there's a lot of flexibility that we can use if we like but the first thing the one thing that we have to choose the thing that is or the two things that don't have default arguments are the following so this filters and this kernel. And this was a thing where we kind of couldn't really decide do we call it the filter do we call it the kernel well it's the same thing okay for some reason we can really agree but that's that's what it is. But the first thing we have to do is just say okay how many small patterns do I want to look for. And the big computer vision models can range anything from. Yeah sometimes into some hundreds maybe a thousand and that's a value for you to to optimize. So this we have to figure out by testing. And that's just how many small patterns am I trying to find in the sense. And the second one okay so I want all these patterns but how big of a pattern should I look for and how we mentioned that actually. Nearly as small as possible is typical typically a good thing. So why does work to have these incredibly small patterns. When we're looking for something big like an image of a cat probably the cat probably fills the entire image and then we're looking for this kind of tiny. Tiny matrices of pixels. Well this I will say that when we start down sampling and kind of removing unnecessary information then. Then we get to yeah three by three in a down sampled image is actually kind of a big portion of the entire image in the end as we will. As we will see. And these are two things we need to need to say so typically you're going to say three by three and then you're kind of good and then. That was it and the rest you can tune once you get to more. Advanced needs presence you can imagine that. Instead of moving the filter at every step maybe I want to move it only at every other step. Maybe that's better I have to test so lots of testing for you to do. So I mentioned I put my filter and all possible spaces and then I end up having fewer pixels in the output. But I can also kind of just move my filter outside of the image if I want the. Like so if I want to put here to be here the same pixel dimension as the image maybe I want this in in some cases. So these are some options that we have and that brings us pretty close to the end so we have to pick this up again tomorrow at standards mentioned. But one thing I wanted to maybe show you was one of the notebooks so if you okay, did I even put this thing if you click on this link can kind of us to the notebooks then you see we have three now which is for for this week. I can click it this link just to see it what it looks like. And that's nice but if you want to run it so either you download it and run it on your own computer or you click this open and call up and then you can just do it in a. Do it in the browser like I have here and then it's super simple right you just start clicking and then go through it. And then plan was for us to have some tutorials which is kind of clicking through and then you're supposed to read and understand and then some exercises where less stuff is given and you have to figure it out yourself more or less. Okay, so this will set the picture machine for us it takes slightly longer up that goes. I can start running the unload some samples looking at numbers so this will be the numbers that we tried to classify and this will be done task for the lab. Do I add when is it at 12 yes so two hours from now. Let's meet that lab and then solve this. So then
